           FIRST AID
    REFERENCE GUIDE




sja.ca
St. John Ambulance Canada would
like to thank Bell Let’s Talk for its funding
and support of our mental health
awareness project.


By including mental health and wellness material in this guide,
we are opening the conversation about mental health in
first aid classes across Canada.
  FIRST AID




REFERENCE GUIDE
  Fourth Edition
Fourth edition – January 2019

Copyright © 2019 Priory of Canada of the Most Venerable Order of
the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem. All rights reserved.

Users are not permitted to perform any of the following actions
without the express written consent of the Priory of Canada of the
Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem (St.
John Ambulance Canada):
    •   Remove any copyright notices or other proprietary notices
        from this book.
    •   Revise, alter, adapt or modify the content of this book.
    •   Create any derivative works incorporating, in part or in
        whole, the content of this book.
    •   Provide or make electronically available this book, or part of
        it, on any website or through any other electronic means.

Certification

Knowledge of the information contained in this book does not
constitute an endorsement of a user’s qualifications by St. John
Ambulance. A user’s qualifications are recognized by St. John
Ambulance only after the successful completion of a St. John
Ambulance training course, which includes practical activities and
formal assessment of knowledge and skills, and the issuance of a
training certificate.

Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication
First Aid: Reference Guide, formerly published as First on the scene:
the complete guide to first aid and CPR. — 4th ed.

Includes index.

ISBN 978-1-897513-00-2

1. First aid in illness and injury. 2. CPR (First aid). I. St. John
Ambulance

II. Title: First Aid : First on the Scene.

RC86.8.F59 2006 616.02’52 C2006-901819-7

Chain of Survival® is a registered trademark of the Heart and Stroke
Foundation of Canada

EpiPen® Auto-Injector is a registered trademark of the EM
Industries, Inc.

Tylenol® is a registered trademark of McNeil Consumer Products.

Tempra® is a registered trademark of Mead Johnson Canada.

Water-Jel® is a registered trademark of Water-Jel Technologies Inc.

Viagra® is a registered trademark of Pfizer Pharmaceuticals.

Printed in Canada           sja.ca   Stock No. 6504-16
Medical advisory group for St. John Ambulance

St. John Ambulance is a leading provider of first aid training in
Canada offering its courses to over half a million Canadians each
year. St. John Ambulance is committed to providing Canadians
with first aid training that is based on scientific evidence and that
reflects emerging trends in first aid and emergency care. A Medical
Advisory Group has been established to support the adoption of
evidence based practice and to contribute to shaping the future of
first aid by providing technical expert advice to
St. John Ambulance.

The purpose of the Medical Advisory Group is to a) provide advice
and recommendations to SJA on the appropriateness of first aid
practices in accordance with the scientific evidence and b) advise
on emerging trends in first aid and emergency care that may impact
SJA programs.

Below are the names and credentials of the members of our
Medical Advisory Group. We are proud to have them as part of
our community.
    •   Dr. Robert Boyko, MD, CCFP(EM), FCFP
    •   Dr. Trevor Jain, BSc, MD, CCFP(EM), MSc
    •   Dr. Brian Metcalfe, BSc, MD, CCFP(EM)
    •   Dr. Jonathan Wallace, PCP, BSc, MD, CCFP(EM,FPA)
        FRACGP
    •   Steven Anas, PCP
    •   Kevin Morgan, BAHSc, A-EMCA
St. John Ambulance
St. John Ambulance is a charity and international humanitarian
organization dedicated to helping Canadians improve their health,
safety and quality of life through training and community service.
Revenue generated from first aid/CPR training supports St. John
Ambulance’s charitable work in Canada and around the world.
Coast-to-coast, more than 12,000 front-line volunteers serve
communities by providing first aid services at public events
and during emergencies. St. John Ambulance volunteers also
improve quality of life through programs that help seniors, the
disadvantaged, and youth.
As Canada’s leading authority in first aid and CPR services since
1883, St. John Ambulance offers innovative programs and products
to save lives at work, home, and play.
To contact your local St. John Ambulance, visit www.sja.ca.

Fast facts
    •   Established in 1883 in Canada with roots going back 900
        years
    •   Issues over 500,000 certificates in first aid and CPR to
        Canadians each year
    •   Supports humanitarian relief efforts across Canada and
        around the world
    •   St. John Ambulance front-line volunteers provide service at
        approximately 10,000 public events annually
    •   More than 1 million volunteer hours of community service
        are provided annually
    •   More than 100,000 individuals were assisted by St. John
        Ambulance volunteers in 2014
    •   365 Canadians were formally recognized for their efforts to
        save a life in 2015
    •   Approximately 3,000 St. John Therapy Dog teams provided
        over 200,000 volunteer hours in 2014
This Reference Guide was developed in accordance with the 2016 Canadian Consensus
Guidelines on First Aid and CPR, an evidence-based set of recommendations on training
and standards of practice for first aid and CPR. The guidelines are released by the Canadian
Guidelines Consensus Task Force comprised of the Heart and Stroke Foundation, the
Canadian Red Cross, St. John Ambulance, the Canadian Ski Patrol, and the Lifesaving Society.

Disclaimer
The information (“Information”) provided in this book is for general use and knowledge and
does not contain all information that may be relevant to every situation. The Information
cannot be relied upon as a substitute for seeking guidance from appropriate professionals,
such as physicians. Users acknowledge and agree that St. John Ambulance is not responsible
or liable for the user’s actions or decisions resulting from the information (including
information regarding medication or other drugs) in this book, including but not limited to
choosing to seek or not to seek advice from medical professionals such as physicians.

St. John Ambulance cautions users of this book not to prescribe or administer any
medication, including over-the-counter medication, except in instances where permitted by
law. Inclusion of symptom relief medication in workplace first aid kits falls outside the scope
of this book. Access and dispensing of symptom relief medication in the workplace must be
done in accordance with the employer directives and any applicable law.

Although St. John Ambulance takes great care to reflect the most current and accurate
information at time of publication, it does not represent or warrant that the information
contained in this book will be accurate or appropriate at time of reading or use due to
evolving medical research, protocols, regulations and laws. It is the responsibility of the user
of this book to be knowledgeable of changes in acceptable practices when providing first aid,
and applicable laws and regulations in which first aid may be provided.

The information in this book is provided “as is” and without warranties or conditions of any
kind either express or implied. To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, under no
circumstances, including, but not limited to, negligence, shall St. John Ambulance be liable
for any direct, indirect, incidental, special or consequential damages that result in any manner
from the use of or reliance on information and answers provided in this book.
Emergency Phone Numbers

Police
Fire
Ambulance
Poison Control
Emergency
Contact
Name
Phone
Home Phone
Street Address
Table of Contents
Chapter 1 Introduction to First Aid             12
Roles and responsibilities                      12
First aid and the law                           15
Safety and personal protection                  17
Help at the emergency scene                     22
Signs and symptoms and mechanism of injury      23
Good communication                              27
Injuries and illnesses                          29
Stress management in emergency situations       31
Chapter 2 Emergency scene management            34
Steps of ESM                                    34
Scene Survey                                    35
Primary Survey                                  35
Secondary survey                                43
Ongoing casualty care                           52
Multiple casualty management (triage)           62
Lifting and moving                              66
Extrication                                     79
Chapter 3 Airway and breathing emergencies      82
Hypoxia                                         82
Effective and ineffective breathing             83
Breathing emergencies caused by illness         85
Choking                                         93
Chapter 4 Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR   106
Cardiovascular disease                         106
Angina and heart attack                        108
Chain of Survival®                             109
Stroke and transient ischemic attack (TIA)     113
Cardiac arrest                                 115
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR)            115
Automated External Defibrillation—AED          124
Chapter 5 Wounds and bleeding                  130
Dressings, bandages, and slings                130
Types of Wounds                                139
Bleeding                                       142
Internal bleeding                              145
Amputations                                    146

8
Minor Wound Care                                        147
First aid for hand and foot injuries                    148
Chest injuries                                          154
Abdominal injuries                                      155
Crush injuries                                          157
Scalp and facial injuries                               158
Eye injuries                                            162
Burns                                                   167
Bites and stings                                        180
Chapter 6 Bone and joint injuries                       188
Fractures                                               188
Dislocations & Sprains                                  189
Head and spinal injuries                                193
Pelvic injury                                           200
Chest injury                                            201
Splinting materials                                     203
First aid for specific bone & joint injuries            205
Strains                                                 223
Chapter 7 Other first aid emergencies                   226
Diabetes                                                226
Seizures and convulsions                                228
Opioid Overdose                                         231
Environmental Emergencies                               235
Cold-related injuries                                   235
Heat-related injuries                                   244
Poisoning                                               249
Emergency childbirth and miscarriage                    253
Mental Health Awareness                                 260
Chapter 8 Basic Life Support for Healthcare Providers   268
Age categories for resuscitation                        268
Artificial respiration                                  270
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)                     278
Quick first aid reference                               289
Appendix A                                              286
Appendix B                                              304
Index                                                   328



                                                              9
Chapter 1
                                 Introduction to
                                 First Aid




•   Roles and responsibilities
•   First aid n the workplace
•   First aid and the law
•   Safety and personal
    protection
•   Signs and symptoms and
    mechanism of injury
•   The importance of
    medical help
•   Stress management in
    emergency situations
    Introduction to Introduction to First Aid




    Chapter 1 Introduction to First Aid
1 This guide covers a wide range of information that will help you
    respond appropriately in a first aid or medical emergency. The
    introductory chapter contains background information, definitions
    and other material related to giving first aid. Chapter 2 explains
    casualty management including issues that relate to assessment of
    the casualty. This chapter also includes topics that are important to
    understand in the first critical moments at the emergency scene.
    Chapter 5 deals with issues of particular interest to health care
    providers—responders with a specific duty to respond within the
    health care system.
    This guide is used to support the teaching of these and other
    courses:
         •    Standard and Emergency First Aid
         •    Basic and Intermediate First Aid
         •    CPR at all levels including Basic Life Support/Health Care
              Provider (BLS/HCP)
    Some content contained in this guide will not pertain specifically
    to the level of training you have received. First aiders should
    always remember not to exceed their training, or the regulations/
    legislation of their province or territory.

    Roles and responsibilities
    What is first aid?
    First aid is emergency help given to an injured or suddenly ill
    person using readily available materials. A person who takes charge
    of an emergency scene and gives first aid is called a first aider. The
    injured or ill person is called a casualty.
    The three priorities of first aid, in order of importance, are to:
         •    Preserve life
         •    Prevent the illness or injury from becoming worse
         •    Promote recovery




    12
                                                     Introduction
                                                               Introduction
                                                                  to First Aidto First Aid




What can a first aider do?
First aiders do not diagnose or treat injuries or illnesses (except,             1
perhaps, when they are very minor)—this is what medical doctors
do. A first aider suspects injuries and illnesses, and gives first aid at
the scene.
Besides giving first aid, it is important to:
    •   Protect the casualty’s belongings
    •   Keep unnecessary people away
    •   Reassure family or friends of the casualty
    •   Clean up the emergency scene and work to correct any
        unsafe conditions that may have caused the injuries in the
        first place
First aiders within a workplace may have obligations and
protections under federal, provincial, and territorial legislation
regarding administering medications. Refer to federal, provincial,
or territorial legislation and regulations for the requirements in your
area.
When assisting with medications, the first aider should check the
label and ensure the following
“5-rights” are met:
    •   Right Person – the name of
        the casualty is the name on the
        medication
    •   Right Medication – is this
        the right medication for this
        situation?
    •   Right Amount – what are the
        dosing instructions
    •   Right Method – how is this
        medication to be taken? (By
        mouth, inhaled, etc.)
    •   Right Time – is this the right time to take this medication?




                                                                            13
    Introduction to First Aid




    A casualty’s age in first aid and CPR
1 The procedures related to the provision of first aid and
    cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) differ in some ways, depending
    on the age and size of the casualty.
    In first aid and CPR:
         •    An infant casualty is under one year old
         •    A child casualty is from age one to age eight
         •    An adult casualty is over eight years of age
    It is important to recognize that these ages are guidelines. The size
    of the casualty must be considered.

    First Aid in the Workplace
    Workplace first aid is emergency care given by a person who is
    trained (and designated) to be the first aid provider to a co-worker
    who is injured or suddenly ill. All provinces and territories have a
    provision within legislation relating to first aid in the workplace.
    Refer to your provincial or territorial regulations for what is required
    in your area.

    Giving first aid as part of your job
    When giving first aid is part of your job, you have a duty to use
    reasonable skill and care based on your level of training. There are
    regulations to protect the first aider. For example in workplaces
    regulated by the Canada Labour Code, Section 126(3) of the
    Code states:
    “No employee is personally liable for anything done or omitted
    to be done in good faith by the employee when the employee is
    assisting the employer, as requested by the employer, in providing
    first-aid or in carrying out any other emergency measures.”
    Every workplace in Canada is required under federal, provincial, or
    territorial regulations to have a first aid kit. The size and contents
    of the first aid kit will be determined by those regulations. First
    aid providers are encouraged to be familiar with the contents of
    their workplace first aid kit, its location, and to conduct regular
    inspections of the kit.



    14
                                                  Introduction to First Aid




First Aid as part of OHS
Provincial and territorial regulations and legislation contain                1
requirements for first aid training in their jurisdiction. Most
regulations require at least one designated first aid provider at work
at all times. The level of training required by the first aid provider
will depend on the size of the workplace, the distance to medical
help, and the risk of injury in the workplace.
To help ensure compliance with regulations, it is recommended
to have more than one person on each shift trained in first aid to
account for holidays, illness, and breaks.
OHS Legislation
Provinces and territories are responsible for establishing
Occupational Health and Safety legislation to protect workers.
All workplaces that fall under provincial or territorial jurisdiction
concerning regulations are required to adhere to the legislation and
regulations of that province or territory. Those work places that fall
under federal jurisdiction are subject to the Canada Labour Code.
Housed within the legislation and regulations are provisions for
adequate first aid coverage for a workplace, usually based on some
or all of the following:
    •   The number of workers
    •   The potential risks
    •   The distance from medical care

First aid and the law
Note that St. John Ambulance is not giving legal advice. This
guide is not intended to replace advice given by a lawyer or legal
professional.

Principles of the Good Samaritan
Across Canada Good Samaritan laws and principles protect
first aiders from lawsuits. You are a Good Samaritan if you are a
bystander who helps a person when you have no legal duty to do
so. As a Good Samaritan, you give your help without being paid,
and you give it in good faith. Whenever you help a person in an
emergency situation, you should abide by the following principles:

                                                                        15
    Introduction to First Aid




         •    You identify yourself as a first aider and get permission to
1             help the injured or ill person before you touch them—this is
              called consent
         •    You use reasonable skill and care in accordance with the
              level of knowledge and skill that you have
         •    You are not negligent in what you do
         •    You do not abandon the person
    Consent
    The law says everyone has the right not to be touched by others. As
    a first aider, you must respect this right.
    Always ask if you can help. If the casualty cannot answer, you have
    what is called implied consent, and you can help.
    If the casualty is an infant or a young child, you must get consent
    from the child’s parent or guardian. If there is no parent or guardian
    at the scene, the law assumes the casualty would give consent if
    they could, so you have implied consent to help.
    A person has the right to refuse your offer of help. In this case,
    do not force first aid on a conscious casualty. If you do not have
    consent to help, there may be other actions you can take without
    touching the casualty, such as controlling the scene, and calling for
    medical help.
    Be aware of difficulties in communicating when a casualty:
         •    Is hard of hearing
         •    Speaks a different language
         •    Is visually impaired
         •    Is a child
         •    Is in pain
         •    Shows signs of mood disorder
    Reasonable skill and care
    As a Good Samaritan, when you give first aid you are expected to
    use reasonable skill and care according to your level of knowledge
    and skills.



    16
                                                    Introduction to First Aid




Negligence
Give only the care that you have been trained to provide, and                   1
always act in the best interest of the casualty.
Abandonment
Never abandon a casualty in your care. Stay until:
    •   You hand them over to medical help
    •   You hand them over to another first aider
                                                          Check your
    •   They no longer want your help—this is              applicable
        usually because the problem is no longer           workplace
        an emergency, and further care is not             legislation/
        needed                                            regulations
Giving first aid in Quebec
The Quebec Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms declares that
any person whose life is in danger has the right to be helped. This
means that you are required to help a person whose life is at risk,
provided you do not put your own life, or anyone else’s, in danger.

Safety and personal protection
In any emergency, first aid providers must always be aware of
hazards and give first aid safely. A hazard is anything that poses a
risk of injury or death to a first aid provider. There are three basic
types of risks to be aware of:
    •   The energy source that caused the original injury—is the
        mechanism that caused the original injury still active,
        causing injury to others? Example: where an injury has been
        caused by machinery, is the machinery still running?
    •   There may be hazards caused by external factors. Example:
        passing vehicles may pose a risk at the scene of a motor
        vehicle incident
    •   There may be hazards associated with first aid procedures
        or a rescue. Example: moving a heavy casualty could place
        the first aider at risk of injury




                                                                          17
    Introduction to First Aid




    Some hazards can be controlled by the first aid provider. When
1   controlling hazards, keep the following principles in mind:
         •    Use mechanical means whenever possible (broom, dustpan,
              tools, etc.)
         •    Be careful when lifting or moving objects on or near a
              casualty
         •    Have someone assist you where possible
         •    Turn on lights where no other risks to doing so exist
         •    Ensure safe footing – many injuries to first aiders are a result
              of slips and falls.
    Hazards that require specialized training to control (electrical
    hazards, fire, gases, etc.) should only be controlled by those who
    are properly trained. Most workplaces that deal regularly with these
    types of hazards will have a specialized response team. Refer to
    your workplace’s policies and protocols.
    When dealing with chemical hazards, a Safety Data Sheet (SDS/
    MSDS) should be accessible and will provide information on how to
    control the hazards along with first aid directions.

    Preventing infection
    Airborne pathogens
    Examples of infections that can be spread through the air are:
         •    Meningitis is a bacterial or viral infection which causes
              swelling that affects the spinal cord and brain
         •    Tuberculosis is a bacterial infection that primarily affects
              the lungs, but can affect any part of the body
         •    Influenza, or “the flu,” is a viral infection which is easily
              spread, and can vary from being mildly debilitating to fatal
    Body fluid and blood-borne pathogens
    Exposure to blood or body fluids (i.e. vomit, feces) poses a health
    risk to first aiders. There are three diseases that first aiders should be
    aware of:
         •    Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is the virus
              responsible for AIDS. There is no vaccine to protect
              people from this virus. The best defence remains adequate
    18
                                                    Introduction to First Aid




        protection to help prevent infection.
    •   Hepatitis B is one of the three common forms of hepatitis,              1
        a viral disease that can cause severe liver damage. Some
        people who have Hepatitis B have no symptoms but are still
        contagious. There is a vaccine to prevent Hepatitis B.
    •   Hepatitis C causes much of the same liver damage as
        Hepatitis B, but there is currently no vaccine available to
        prevent this disease.
Sharp objects
If a sharp object touches infected blood and then pricks or cuts
your skin, you could become infected. First aiders do not use sharp
objects like scalpels and needles, but there may be broken glass or
other sharp objects that have been in contact with blood or other
bodily fluids. Always wear gloves and handle sharp objects with
extreme care.

Personal Protective Equipment
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) is clothing and equipment
used to protect the first aider and to minimize the risks of health
and safety hazards when in contact with a casualty. PPE can
be gloves, a pocket mask used for ventilations, a helmet, eye
protection, safety boots, etc.
Use a face mask or shield when providing artificial respiration or
CPR. Always follow the manufacturer’s directions for disinfecting
and cleaning reusable items. Single-use masks, one-way valves, and
gloves are disposed of by double bagging with other contaminated
articles. If used in the workplace, follow provincial/territorial and/or
company protocols for disposal of hazardous items.
Disposable gloves prevent direct hand contact
between the first aider and the casualty. Wear
gloves when you might touch blood, bodily
fluids, tissue or anything that has come in
contact with one of these.
If you tear a glove, wash your hands as soon
as possible, and put on a new pair. Dispose
of contaminated gloves by sealing them in a
plastic bag and double-bagging them.

                                                                          19
   Introduction to First Aid




   How to remove gloves
1 Once gloves have been used, they are contaminated and are a
   possible source of infection. Take them off without touching their
   outer surface following the steps below.




   20
                                                     Introduction to First Aid




Protecting the first aider
Areas of the body that may have come into contact with a casualty                1
need to be cleaned with hot, soapy water, an anti-septic solution,
or a mixture of bleach and water (at a ratio of 1:10). Spills should be
cleaned, then sanitized with the bleach and water solution for 20
minutes.
Anyone who has been exposed to possible contaminants should
take a hot shower with soap and rinse thoroughly. Anyone who has
been exposed to contaminants from a needle stick or sharps injury
should seek medical attention.
If an injury occurs due to violence, or a first aider and/or casualty
becomes at risk due to violence, you must protect yourself and call
for help. Your skills as a first aider are valuable only when the area is
safe.

Clean up
After an emergency, it is important to clean-up the area and
equipment used properly. Any hard surfaces should be disinfected.
Fabrics, where possible, should be laundered. Porous surfaces or
materials that cannot be laundered may need to be disposed of.
    •   Items intended to be reused (scissors, forceps) should
        be wiped of blood and fluids, immersed in a 10% bleach
        solution (or other disinfecting solution) for 10 minutes, then
        rinsed and dried
    •   One-time use items (gauze, gloves) should be put into a
        garbage bag and tied. That garbage bag can then be put
        into the regular garbage.
    •   Any surfaces contaminated by blood or other fluids should
        be cleaned with a bleach solution or other disinfecting
        solution
Sharps
In an emergency, sharp objects (or “sharps”) may be the cause of
the injuries, or used in the first aid. It is important to dispose of
these sharp objects properly for both the safety of first aid providers
and others. Sharps can include needles, knives, and broken glass.
These items may contain contaminated blood and can cut the first
aider, exposing them to the contamination.
                                                                           21
    Introduction to First Aid




    Cleaning up glass should always be done with mechanical means
1   such as a broom and dustpan. The cleaned up glass should be
    placed in a puncture-proof container like a cardboard box.
    When handling knives, always grasp
    by the handle and carried blade down.
    Cleaning knives should follow the
    steps above for hard surfaces.
    Needles should be disposed of in
    a sharps container. These plastic
    containers have thick walls and a
    secured lid that prevents accidental
    punctures. Ambulances will carry
    sharps containers and any needles
    found or used during an emergency
    can be placed in these containers.
    Always handle needles by the barrel
    (the plastic part with the plunger) and
    never try to re-cap a used needle.
    Needles must never be disposed of into the general garbage.

    Help at the emergency scene
    Bystanders should be asked to leave unless asked to stay and
    assist.
    Other first aiders may offer to help. Identify yourself and accept
    their assistance. If someone is more qualified to handle the
    situation, you may ask that person to take control.
    First responders include ambulance personnel, police officers
    and firefighters. They will take charge of the scene as soon as they
    arrive.
    Other authorities may be called to the scene (e.g. an electrical
    utility crew may arrive if there are downed power lines). Identify
    yourself and continue giving first aid.
    Off-duty doctors, nurses and other health professionals may
    identify themselves and offer to help.




    22
                                                     Introduction to First Aid




Ten ways a bystander can help
    1.   Make the area safe                                                      1
    2.   Find all the casualties
    3.   Find a first aid kit
    4.   Control the crowd
    5.   Call for medical help
    6.   Help give first aid, under your direction
    7.   Gather and protect the casualty’s belongings
    8.   Take notes
    9.   Reassure the casualty’s relatives
    10. Lead the paramedics to the scene of the emergency

Signs and symptoms and mechanism of injury
When referring to injuries, first aiders need to understand signs and
symptoms.
    •    A sign is something we can see, feel, hear or smell (e.g.
         bleeding, bruising, agonal breathing, skin discolouration).
    •    A symptom is something the casualty is feeling (e.g.
         nauseous, weakness, pain) and must tell you.
Mechanism of injury encompasses both what happened to the
casualty, and how the injury has affected the casualty. It identifies
the cause of the injury. Mechanisms of injury that require an
ambulance right away:
    •    A fall from 6.5 meters (20 feet) or more
    •    A vehicle collision with signs of a severe impact
    •    Severe damage to the inside of the vehicle, a bent steering
         wheel, or a broken windshield
    •    Casualty was thrown from a vehicle
    •    The vehicle has rolled over
    •    Casualty was struck by a vehicle
    •    Crush injuries


                                                                           23
    Introduction to First Aid




    When any of these mechanisms are apparent, call an ambulance as
1   soon as you can. When we understand the cause of the injury, we
    are able to predict what injuries may be present and what injuries
    are not likely, even in situations in which there are no visible signs of
    injury and/or the casualty is unable to describe their symptoms.

    Signs and symptoms
                Examples of Signs and Symptoms
     Signs you can see              Blood, deformity, bruising, unequal
                                    pupils, painful expression and/
                                    or flinching, sweating, wounds,
                                    unusual chest movement, skin colour,
                                    swelling, foreign bodies, vomit,
                                    incontinence
     Signs you can hear             Noisy or distressed breathing,
                                    groans, sucking wounds (chest
                                    injury), bones scraping together,
                                    quality of speech
     Signs you can feel             Dampness, skin temperature,
                                    swelling, deformity
     Signs you can smell            Casualty’s breath (fruity breath,
                                    acetone/nail polish breath, or
                                    alcohol), vomit, incontinence, gas
                                    fumes, burning, solvents or glue
     Symptoms the casualty          Pain, fear, heat, cold, loss of normal
     may tell you about             movement, loss of sensation,
                                    numbness, tingling sensation, thirst,
                                    nausea, faintness, stiffness, feeling
                                    faint, weakness, memory loss,
                                    dizziness, sensation of a broken bone




    24
                                                    Introduction to First Aid




The importance of medical help
In first aid, any type of medical care is referred to as medical help.          1
Unless an injury is very minor, you should always make sure the
casualty receives medical help following first aid. Medical help may
be given at the scene, en route to a medical facility, or in a hospital.
Know the EMS telephone number for your community. This is often
9-1-1 in urban areas. If you are outside of your community, find the
EMS phone numbers in the first few pages of the telephone book,
or search online.
Calling for medical help is important. The period immediately
following a severe, life-threatening injury is known as the golden
hour. This time is “golden” because the faster a casualty makes it
to a hospital emergency room or operating room, the better the
chances of survival and recovery.
You can ask a bystander to call for medical help. Provide the person
with:
    •   Necessary phone number
    •   A description of the casualty’s condition
    •   Directions to follow to reach the scene
    •   Instructions to report back to you after getting medical help
If you are alone, you must decide whether to stay with the casualty
or leave to get help. The correct decision will depend on the
specifics of the situation. If you have a mobile phone, call from the
scene and perform first aid with the dispatcher’s assistance.

Medical care
As a first aider you are not trained to diagnose the nature and
extent of an injury or illness; a medical doctor has the training to
do this. As a rule, make sure the casualty receives medical care
following first aid. For minor injuries, this may not be necessary.
Medical care is either given by a medical doctor or under the
supervision of a medical doctor. Paramedics give medical care
because they work under the supervision of medical doctors.
Medical care is given in hospitals but it can also be given at the
emergency scene or on the way to a medical facility.


                                                                          25
  Introduction to First Aid




  Call an ambulance or drive the casualty to the
1 hospital?
  Always call an ambulance if you can; only transport the casualty to
  medical help yourself if that is the only possible way to get medical
  help. Transporting an injured person is often difficult and time-
  consuming. An ambulance or other rescue vehicle is well-equipped,
  and the casualty can begin receiving medical help as soon as it
  arrives.
  When an ambulance arrives, do not stop the first aid you are
  providing until the crew has arrived to the casualty and indicates
  they are ready to take over. Give a short report to the ambulance
  crew on the situation; the condition of the casualty; and what you
  have done so far.

  Use MIST to help remember what to report:

       M – Mechanism of Injury
       I – Injuries or illnesses found
       S – Signs and symptoms
       T – Treatment (first aid) provided so far
  The Good Samaritan principles only protect you when giving care at
  the scene of the emergency, or while transporting the casualty when
  this is needed to save the casualty’s life and medical help is not
  available. Transporting the casualty unnecessarily leaves you liable if
  it results in further injury should an accident or incident occur while
  en route to a hospital or medical station.




  26
                                                    Introduction to First Aid




Good communication
Communication is necessary in every emergency situation,                        1
regardless of the details. As the first aider, there are many people
you may need to communicate with – the casualty, bystanders,
family members, other first aiders, EMS providers, and other
professionals (e.g. police, fire, hydro). Effective communication skills
will help you to assess the casualty’s condition, and explain what
you are doing and why.
Some rules for effective communication:
    •   Be calm and direct
    •   Be respectful
    •   Do not use medical terms
    •   Call the casualty by name
    •   Do not diagnose the casualty’s condition
    •   Always be honest, reassuring, and choose your words
        carefully
As a first aider, the first thing you do when you arrive at an
emergency scene is take charge of the situation. You stay in charge
until you hand control of the scene over to more qualified people.
While in charge, many other people may offer to help.
When handing the scene over to someone other than the casualty,
describe the complete history of the incident and pass along any
notes you have taken. Be sure to include:
    •   Your name
    •   The time you arrived
    •   The history of the illness or injury, including signs and
        symptoms observed
    •   What first aid has been given
    •   Any changes in the casualty’s condition since you took
        charge

Principles of communication
Though each situation is different, the following general guidelines
help improve communication.

                                                                          27
    Introduction to First Aid




    Focus
1 Maintain your attention on the casualty. Position yourself at eye
    level and maintain eye contact.
    Terminology
    Refrain from using medical terminology when communicating with
    the casualty or bystanders. Explanations and answers must be clear,
    concise and easily understood.
    Body Language
    Refrain from using body language that could be perceived as
    threatening or aggressive.
    Professionalism
    Always maintain your professionalism. Explain everything you
    are doing and why. If what you are doing may be painful, let the
    casualty know.

    Barriers to communication
    Despite following the principles of communication above, there are
    certain barriers that may arise making communication difficult.
         •    Language – the casualty or bystanders may not speak the
              same language as the first aid provider
         •    Physical – the casualty or bystanders may have a hearing,
              speech, or visual impairment
         •    Cognitive – the casualty or bystander may not understand
              the questions or requests
         •    Cultural – different cultures approach interactions with
              others which may impact communication
         •    Environment – noisy situations can make communication
              very difficult
         •    Technical – failure or limitations of communication devices
              (radios, phones) can hinder communication
    When faced with these barriers, the first aid provider may have to
    attempt several different ways to gather information or
    give directions.



    28
First aid providers should also remember to keep things simple,
clear, and to the point. Drawn out descriptions using large words
can make it very difficult for the casualty or those around to
                                                                              1
understand. An example would be “Get me the AED” instead of
“I need you to find an Automated External Defibrillator so I can
perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation.”

Injuries and illnesses
Injuries
When something from outside the body damages tissues, the
damaged area is called an injury. How serious an injury is depends
on:
    •   What tissues are injured—an injury to a vital organ, or
        tissues of a vital system, like the nervous system, is serious
    •   How bad the injury is—for instance, a bone broken in half
        may not be as serious as the same bone shattered into
        many pieces
    •   How much tissue is injured—a burned hand may be more
        serious than a burned finger Injuries and energy

Injuries and energy
Injuries result from too much energy being applied to the body.
For instance:
    •   A thermal burn is caused by too much heat energy
    •   An acid burn is caused by too much chemical energy
    •   Snow-blindness is caused by too much light energy
    •   A broken bone is caused by too much mechanical energy
    •   A stopped heart from an electric shock is caused by too
        much electrical energy
The body can take a certain amount of energy without being
injured. But too much of any sort of energy will cause injury. Three
factors determine whether an injury will occur. They are:
    •   How intense the energy was
    •   How long the energy was applied to the body
    •   What part of the body the energy was applied to
                                                                         29
    Most injuries are caused either by something hitting the body
1   or the body hitting something—this is mechanical energy. When
    something moves, it has mechanical energy. How much mechanical
    energy something has depends on how fast it is moving and how
    much it weighs.

    Illness
    We often think of first aid in the context of injuries only.
    But when someone becomes very sick, the result can be
    a medical emergency in which first aid can save a life.
    Some illnesses, like heart attacks or strokes come on very fast.
    Other illnesses progress more slowly and it can be hard to decide
    exactly when you have a medical problem that calls for a
    doctor’s attention.
    Get medical help when any of the following is present:
         •    Sudden severe pain in any part of the body
         •    Sudden changes in vision, headache or dizziness
         •    Severe or persistent diarrhea or vomiting
         •    Sudden weakness or slurred/jumbled speech
         •    Persistent high temperature
         •    Changes in level of consciousness
         •    Rash of unknown origin
         •    Repeated fainting
         •    Obvious depression, suicide threats or attempts
         •    Whenever you are very worried about yourself or someone
              in your care
    If the casualty is an infant, the following are also reasons to get
    medical help (in addition to the reasons above):
         •    The baby has had a seizure
         •    The baby is blue or very pale
         •    You think the baby is having trouble breathing
         •    The baby cries a lot, or won’t stop crying



    30
Stress management in emergency situations
First aiders may experience a certain level of stress as a result of         1
the assistance they provide. Stress is the body’s normal reaction
to physical and psychological events. It can be seen in certain
attitudes and behaviours in both casualties and first aiders. It is a
biological response and may be reflected in:
    •   An increase in heart rate
    •   An increase in blood pressure
    •   An increase in blood sugar
    •   Dilation of the bronchi and pupils

Possible reactions of casualties
Casualties may react to stressors in different ways and first aiders
must observe and adjust to such reactions which can include:
    •   Denial—the casualty may deny the seriousness of the
        situation and refuse assistance
    •   Resignation—the casualty may be resigned to dying even
        if their life does not seem to be in danger, and doesn’t want
        to make any effort to do what is needed
    •   Aggressiveness—the casualty may be hostile
    •   Assertiveness—the casualty is positive, cooperative, and
        may even want to take charge of their own care including
        directing the first aiders

Stress management
Managing stress in an emergency situation can make a significant
difference in the quality of first aid provided. Appropriate mental
preparation and regular first aid skill practice can help first aiders
react effectively when faced with an emergency situation. The
negative impact of stress can be reduced by understanding it and
taking measures to try and overcome it. After serious incidents, it is
important for first aiders to process their emotions.
When faced with a highly stressful situation some first aiders may
experience prolonged effects of stress and they should seek
medical assistance.


                                                                        31
Chapter 2
                       Emergency Scene
                       Management




• Four steps in ESM
• Step one: scene survey
• Step two: primary survey
• Step three: secondary survey
• Step four: ongoing casualty care
• Shock
• Fainting
• Multiple casualty management
  (triage)
• Lifting and moving
    Emergency scene management




    Chapter 2 Emergency scene management
    Emergency scenes generally begin with confusion as people realize
    there is an emergency unfolding in front of them. No one knows
2   what to do first, who should be in charge, or how they can help. In
    this situation, the first aider needs to follow a sequence of actions
    that ensures safe and appropriate first aid is given and everyone’s
    safety is protected. First aiders use emergency scene management
    (ESM) to do this. Emergency scene management is the sequence of
    actions you should follow to ensure safe and appropriate first aid is
    given.

    Steps of ESM
         1.   Scene survey—during the scene survey you take control of
              the scene, find out what happened and make sure the area
              is safe before assessing the casualty.
         2.   Primary survey—assess each casualty for life-threatening
              injuries and illnesses, call or send someone to call 9-1-1,
              and give life-saving first aid.
         3.   Secondary survey—the secondary survey is a step-by-step
              way of gathering information to form a complete picture of
              the casualty’s overall condition.
         4.   Ongoing casualty care—during ongoing casualty care you
              continue to monitor the casualty’s condition until medical
              help takes over.
    These steps are generally done in the order above. The initial scene
    survey, primary survey and the start of life-saving first aid usually
    happens within one or two minutes. The secondary survey is not
    always necessary.




    34
                                             Emergency scene management




Scene Survey
    •   Take charge of the situation
    •   Call out for help to attract bystanders
    •   Assess hazards and make the area safe                             2
    •   Find out the history of the emergency, how many casualties
        there are and the mechanism(s) of injury
    •   Identify yourself as a first aider and offer to help, get
        consent
    •   Assess responsiveness
Send or go for medical help as soon as you identify a serious
problem and then begin the primary survey. If you have a mobile
phone, you can dial 9-1-1 or your local emergency number, and put
the device on speaker phone, if possible. This allows the first aider
to remain with the casualty.

Primary Survey
Check for life-threatening conditions, the ABCs:
     A = Airway
     B = Breathing
     C = Circulation
The sequential steps of the primary survey should be performed
with the casualty in the position found unless it is impossible to do
so.
The primary survey should begin immediately after the scene
survey.
Check the airway
If the casualty is conscious, ask “what happened?” How well the
casualty responds will help you determine if the airway is clear. Use
a head-tilt-chin-lift to open the airway of an unresponsive casualty.
If you suspect a head or spinal injury, and have been trained, use a
jaw-thrust without head-tilt.




                                                                     35
    Emergency scene management




    Check for breathing
         •   If the casualty is conscious, check by asking how their
             breathing is.

2        •   If the casualty is unconscious, check for breathing for
             at least five seconds, and no more than 10 seconds. If
             breathing is effective, move on to check circulation. If
             breathing is absent or ineffective (gasping and irregular,
             agonal), begin CPR.
    Check circulation
         •   Control obvious, severe bleeding
         •   Check for shock by checking skin condition and
             temperature
         •   Check with a rapid body survey for hidden, severe, external
             bleeding and signs of internal bleeding

    Rapid body survey
    The rapid body survey is a quick assessment of the casualty’s body
    which is performed during the primary survey. By running your
    hands over the casualty’s entire body from head to toe (and under
    heavy outwear), you are able to feel for severe bleeding, internal
    bleeding and any obvious fractures.
    When performing the rapid body survey:
         •   Wear gloves when possible, and check gloves for blood
             every few seconds
         •   Be careful not to cause any further injuries while performing
             the survey
         •   Look at the casualty’s face to notice any responses to the
             rapid body survey




    36
                                              Emergency scene management




Provide first aid for life-threatening injuries or
conditions.
    •    Maintain an open airway with a head-tilt chin-lift or by
         placing the unresponsive breathing casualty into the
         recovery position
                                                                              2
    •    Provide CPR if the unresponsive casualty is not breathing or
         not breathing normally (gasping)
    •    Control severe bleeding
    •    Provide support for obvious fractures
    •    Give first aid for shock by providing first aid for life-
         threatening injuries and maintaining the casualty’s body
         temperature
    •    Evaluate the situation and decide whether to do a
         secondary survey
Do a secondary survey if:
    •    The casualty has more than one injury
    •    Medical help will be delayed more than 20 minutes
    •    Medical help is not coming to the scene and you have to
         transport the casualty
If you do not do a secondary survey, steady and support any injuries
found and give ongoing casualty care until medical help arrives.

How to turn a casualty face up
You should give first aid in the position in which the casualty is
found as much as possible. But sometimes you have to turn a
casualty over to assess for life-threatening injuries or to give life-
saving first aid
    1.   Extend the arm closest to you over the head.




                                                                         37
    Emergency scene management




         2.   Tuck the far arm against the casualty’s side.




2


         3.   Cross the far foot over the near foot.




         4.   Support the head and neck. Firmly grip the clothing at the
              waist. Roll the casualty over




         5.   Position the casualty for giving first aid




    38
                                            Emergency scene management




ESM when a head or spinal injury is suspected
If you suspect a head or spinal injury, protect the head and neck
from any movement. Head or neck movement could result in life-
long disability or death. Adjust your first aid to this situation as        2
shown below
    1.   As soon as you see there might be a head or spinal injury,
         tell the casualty not to move




    2.   Once you have consent to help the casualty, steady and
         support the head and neck. Keep elbows firmly supported
         on thighs or ground. Then, assess responsiveness.




                                                                       39
    Emergency scene management




         3.   If there is a bystander to help, show them how to support
              the head and neck so you can continue your assessment.


2




         4.   Continue your assessment.




    40
                                             Emergency scene management




    5.   If a second bystander is available, show them how to steady
         and support the feet to prevent movement.


                                                                           2




    6.   Keep the head and neck supported (and the feet if
         possible) while giving further first aid until handover to
         medical help.




When moving a casualty with a suspected head or spinal injury,
move them as a unit as much as possible. This means rolling the
head, trunk and legs together, or lifting the whole body at the same
time. Do what you can to prevent movement.




                                                                      41
    Emergency scene management




    Turning a casualty face up when a head or spinal
    injury is suspected
    You should give first aid in the position in which the casualty is
2   found as much as possible. But sometimes you have to turn a
    casualty over to assess for life-threatening injuries or give life-saving
    first aid
    When you suspect a head or spinal injury, turn the casualty as a unit
    so the head and spine stay in the same relative position
         1.   The first aider at the head supports the head—placing the
              right hand along the right side of the casualty’s head and
              the left hand along the left side




         2.   The other first aider extends the casualty’s near arm over
              their head and gets a good grip on the casualty at the
              shoulder and waist.
         3.   At the same time, the two first aiders roll the casualty
              towards the second first aider.




    42
                                               Emergency scene management




    4.   If extra help is available, have the third first aider support
         the legs to prevent twisting of the neck and spine. With a
         fourth, put one first aider at the shoulders and another at
         the waist.
                                                                               2




Secondary survey
A secondary survey follows the primary survey and any life-saving
first aid. It is a step-by-step way of gathering information to form
a complete picture of the casualty. In the secondary survey, the
first aider is looking for injuries or illnesses that may not have been
revealed in the primary survey. You should complete a secondary
survey if:
    •    The casualty has more than one injury
    •    Medical help will be delayed for 20 minutes or more
    •    You will transport the casualty to medical help
The secondary survey has four steps:
    1.   History
    2.   Vital signs
    3.   Head-to-toe exam
    4.   First aid for any injury or illness found




                                                                          43
    History
    A SAMPLE history is used to gather a brief medical history of
    the casualty. This information may be useful for health care
2   professionals who will continue to assist the casualty. If the casualty
    is unable to respond, some of the SAMPLE history could be
    answered by a close family member.
    S = symptoms – what the casualty is feeling (such as pain, nausea,
    weakness, etc.)
    A = allergies – any allergies, specifically allergies to medications
    M = medications – any medications or supplements they normally
    take, have taken in the past 24 hours, or any doses they may have
    missed
    P = past or present medical history – any medical history,
    especially if it is related to what they are experiencing now. Ask if
    they have medical alert information
    L = last meal – last meal they ate and when, anything else taken by
    mouth
    E = events leading to the incident – what was happening before
    the injury/illness? How did the injury occur?

    Vital signs
    There are four vital signs to check on the casualty
         1.   Level of consciousness (LOC)
         2.   Breathing
         3.   Pulse
                                                             Check your
         4.   Skin condition and temperature
                                                              applicable
                                                              workplace
                                                             legislation/
                                                             regulations




    44
Level of consciousness (LOC)
A common method of obtaining a casualty’s LOC is using the
acronym AVPU. When using AVPU to indicate LOC, it is a scale
which ranges from good (A), to not as good (V), to bad (P), to
worse (U)                                                                   2
A = Alert – An alert casualty will have their eyes open and will be
able to answer simple questions. An alert casualty is oriented to
person, place and time.
V = Verbal – The casualty will respond when spoken to, but may
not be able to effectively communicate. They may not be oriented
to person, place or time.
P = Pain – This casualty
will only respond
when a painful stimuli
is delivered, such as
pinching them or rubbing
your knuckles on their
sternum. They may move
or make noise, but they
will not communicate.
U = Unresponsive – the
unresponsive casualty will not respond to any stimulus.
Please note that an alternative to quickly estimate a casualty’s
LOC is to evaluate their eye, verbal and motor skills. If their eyes
are open, they can clearly speak, and obey a command such as
“squeeze my fingers,” they are alert
Breathing
To assess the breathing rate, watch
the casualty closely for a total of 30
seconds. It is OK to place your hand
on their upper abdomen to feel the
rise and fall. Check the quality of the
breathing. Carefully count each breath
over the 30 seconds and multiply that
number by two for breaths per minute.




                                                                       45
                        Normal breathing rates
         Age            Too slow             Normal            Too fast
         Infant         Below 25              30-50           Above 60
2        Child          Below 15              20-30           Above 40
         Adult          Below 10              10-20           Above 30
    Pulse
    The pulse rate is the number of beats your heart takes in one
    minute, and it is an essential skill for assessing all casualties. The
    most common places to assess a pulse is at the wrist or neck, and
    for infants, the inside of the upper arm.
    To assess the pulse, use two fingers and gently place them on either
    the inside of the wrist (just below the hand
    on the thumb side), or on the side of the
    neck (carotid artery), or for infants, the inside
    of the upper arm, on the brachial artery.
    Press just gently enough to feel the pulse.
    You may have to feel around the area until
    you find it. Once you have found the pulse,
    count the number of beats over 30 seconds
    and multiply that number by two.


                              Normal pulse rates
                     Age                         Normal pulse range
                     Infant                             120-150
                     Child                              80-150
                     Adult                              60-100
    Skin condition and temperature
    When assessing the skin we look for the temperature (warm or
    cold), the colour (normal skin tones or pale) and whether the skin is
    dry or wet. Use the back of your gloved hand to feel the casualty’s
    forehead and cheeks. If their skin normal, they will have normal skin
    colour, and their skin will be warm and dry. If the skin is pale, cold
    and wet (sweaty), this could be an indication of shock.


    46
Head-to-toe exam
The head-to-toe exam is a complete and detailed check of the
casualty for any injuries that may have been missed during the
rapid body survey. Do not examine for unlikely injuries. You may
need to expose an area to check for injuries, but always respect the
                                                                           2
casualty’s modesty and ensure you protect them from the cold. Only
expose what you absolutely have to.
    •   Ask the casualty if they feel any pain before you start. Note
        any responses.
    •   Speak to the casualty throughout the process. Explain what
        you are checking for as you proceed.
    •   Always watch the casualty’s face for any facial expressions
        that may indicate pain.
    •   Do not stop the exam. If you find an injury, note it and
        continue.
    •   Do not step over the casualty. If you need to, walk around
        them.
    •   During a detailed exam, you are looking for all bumps,
        bruises, scrapes, or anything that is not normal.
    •   If the casualty is unconscious, look for medic alert devices
        during your survey, such as a tag, bracelet, necklace, watch,
        or other indicator.
    •   Look, then feel




                                                                      47
    Start at the head:
         •   Check the skull for anything abnormal
         •   Check the ears for fluid
2        •   Check the eyes, are the pupils the same size?
         •   Check the nose for drainage
         •   Check the mouth, are the teeth intact? Are the lips blue or
             pale?




    Check the neck:
         •   Are the neck veins bulging?
         •   Is there a medical alert necklace?
         •   Check the collarbones
         •   Check the shoulders on both sides




    Check the arms:
         •   Check each arm completely
         •   Check the fingernails for circulation by squeezing and
             watching the blood return


    48
   •   Ask the casualty to squeeze two of your fingers in both
       hands at the same time. Do they have an adequate strength
       and is the strength equal?

                                                                      2




Check the chest and under:
   •   Does it hurt the casualty to breathe?
   •   Does the chest rise and fall with breaths as it should?
   •   Reach around the back as far as you can




                                                                 49
    Check the abdomen and under:
         •   With flat hands, check the abdomen carefully
         •   Do not push into the abdomen. Gently feel for pain,
2            tenderness, or rigidity
         •   Place a flat hand on their abdomen and ask the casualty to
             push against it. Does this cause pain?
         •   Reach around the back as far as you can




    Check the pelvis:
         •   Place your hands on top of the pelvic bones and very gently
             squeeze for stability




    50
Check the legs, ankles, and feet:
    •   Check each leg completely one at a time
    •   Is one leg shorter than the other?
    •   Carefully check the stability of the kneecap and under the         2
        knee
    •   Squeeze or pinch a foot. Ask the casualty what you just did
        to see if they answer correctly.
    •   Place both hands on both feet. Ask the casualty to push
        and then pull against you. Feel for equal strength. Ask the
        casualty to wiggle their toes and watch for the response.
    •   Check circulation




First aid for injuries found
When you have completed your exam, give appropriate first aid
for any injuries or illnesses found. If the casualty has more than one
injury, give first aid to the more serious injuries first.

Document
Upon completion of the secondary survey, document your findings
as accurately as possible. This information may be valuable to
medical professionals who will continue to assist the casualty.
Documentation is also important in a workplace emergency as
it may be used as part of an investigation. Documentation of
the incident and the first aid given should be completed on pre-
printed forms and maintained as required by provincial regulations/
legislation for reference by investigators.



                                                                      51
    Ongoing casualty care
    Once first aid for injuries and illnesses that are not life threatening
    has been given:

2        •   The first aider will hand over control of the scene to the
             casualty, or someone else, and end their involvement in the
             emergency
         •   The first aider will stay in control of the scene and wait for
             medical help to take over, or
         •   The first aider will stay in control of the scene and transport
             the casualty to medical help
    The first aid must maintain the casualty in the best possible
    condition until handover to medical help by:
         •   Giving first aid for shock
         •   Position the casualty based upon their condition
         •   Monitoring the casualty’s condition
         •   Recording the events of the situation
         •   Reporting on what happened to whoever takes over
    Instruct a bystander to maintain manual support of the head and
    neck (if head/spinal injuries are suspected). Continue to steady and
    support manually, if needed.

    Recovery Position
    This position protects the casualty and also reduces bending and
    twisting of the spine. This position protects the airway if you must
    leave the casualty.




    52
1.   Position the arm closest to you at 90 degrees in front of the
     casualty, keeping it out of the way when rolling them.


                                                                        2




2.   Position the arm furthest from you on the casualty’s chest.
     Bend the far knee.




3.   Reach behind the casualty’s shoulder and roll casualty
     towards you by pulling on the far knee.




                                                                   53
         4.   Adjust the position of the arms and leg so the casualty is in
              a stable position. Place the far arm at 90 degrees to the
              casualty with the palm down.

2




         5.   Give ongoing care.




    After the handover
    In first aid, we prepare ourselves to care for an injured or ill person.
    We don’t often think about what happens after the casualty has left
    our care. Immediately following the handover of the casualty you
    may have a number of practical details to attend to. These details
    can include cleaning up after the emergency, correcting any unsafe
    conditions that caused the injury, or making a report on the incident
    and your involvement.
    Once these practical matters are out of the way, we expect things
    to “return to normal.” However, you will likely find yourself thinking
    about the situation and the details of what happened while you
    were involved. Following a stressful event, many people review the
    details and try to evaluate what they did and how they could have
    done it better.


    54
This reviewing of the events is completely normal and you can
expect it to happen. But if thoughts of the incident continue for
many weeks, or if they affect your day-to-day life, you may be
experiencing the negative effects of critical incident stress (CIS).
Critical incident stress is a common reaction to a stressful                2
emergency situation. The effects of CIS can interfere with your
daily life—your job, your relationships, your peace of mind. If this
happens to yourself, you need to do something about it, and help
is readily available. Start by talking to your family doctor or a doctor
at a walk-in clinic. A doctor will understand what you are going
through and will suggest a course of action.
The effects of critical incident stress can appear many weeks,
months or years after the event.

Shock
Shock is a circulation problem where the body’s tissues don’t get
enough oxygenated blood.
Shock is a danger because any physical injury or illness can be
accompanied by shock, and it can quickly progress into a life-
threatening condition. Pain, anxiety and fear do not cause shock,
but they can make it worse, or make it progress faster. This is why
reassuring a casualty and making them comfortable is important.
Medical shock should not be confused with electrical shock or
being shocked and surprised. Medical shock is life-threatening, as
the brain and other organs cannot function properly.
The following information provides some causes of shock. Severe
shock can also result from medical emergencies such as diabetes,
epilepsy, infection, poisoning or a drug overdose.
*For casualties with dark skin colour, the colour changes may be
observed in the following areas of the body: lips, gums and tongue,
nail beds and palms, earlobes, membrane of the inner eyelid.




                                                                       55
                    Common causes of severe shock
           Cause of shock               How it causes a circulation
                                                 problem
2    Severe bleeding - internal      Not enough blood to fill blood
     or external (includes major     vessels
     fractures)
     Severe burns                    Loss of blood plasma (fluid) into
                                     tissues—not enough blood to fill
                                     blood vessels
     Crush injuries                  Loss of blood and blood plasma
                                     into tissues—not enough blood to
                                     fill blood vessels
     Heart attack                    Heart is not strong enough to
                                     pump blood effectively
     Spinal cord or nerve injuries   Brain can’t control the size of the
                                     blood vessels—the blood can’t get
                                     to the tissues properly
     severe allergic reactions       Many things can be affected—
                                     breathing, heart function, etc.




    56
          Signs and symptoms of shock
           Signs                      Symptoms
•   Pale skin at first, turns    •   Restless
    blue-grey*                                          2
•   blue-purple lips, tongue,    •   Anxious
    earlobes, fingernails
•   Cold and clammy skin         •   Disoriented
•   Breathing shallow and        •   Confused
    irregular, fast or gasping
    for air
•   Changes in level of          •   Afraid
    consciousness
•   Weak, rapid pulse—radial     •   Dizzy
    pulse may be absent
                                 •   Thirsty




                                                   57
    First aid for shock
    The following actions will minimize shock:
         1.   Give first aid for the injury or illness that caused the shock
2        2.   Reassure the casualty often
         3.   Minimize pain by handling the casualty gently
         4.   Loosen tight clothing at the neck, chest and waist
         5.   Keep the casualty warm, but do not overheat — use jackets,
              coats or blankets if you have them
         6.   Moisten the lips if the casualty complains of thirst. Don’t
              give anything to eat or drink. If medical help is delayed
              many hours, give small amounts of water or clear fluids to
              drink — make a note of what was given and when
         7.   Place the casualty in the best position for their condition 		
              Continue ongoing casualty care until handover
    The above first aid for shock may prevent shock from getting worse.
    Whenever possible, add these steps to any first aid you give.

    Positioning a casualty in shock
    Putting the casualty in the right position can slow the progress of
    shock and make the casualty more comfortable.
    The position you use depends on the casualty’s condition. The
    casualty should be as comfortable as possible in the position you
    use.
    No suspected head/spinal injury; fully conscious
    Place the casualty on their back, if injuries permit. Once the casualty
    is positioned, cover them to preserve body heat, but do not
    overheat.
    No suspected head/spinal injury; less than fully conscious
    Place the casualty in the recovery position. When there is decreased
    level of consciousness, airway and breathing are the priority—the
    recovery position ensures an open airway.




    58
Conscious with a breathing emergency and/or chest pain
If a conscious casualty is experiencing chest pain or is having
difficulty breathing, have them sit in a semi-sitting position, or any
position that makes breathing easier for them.
Suspected head/spinal injury
                                                                              2
If you suspect a head or spinal injury, steady and support the
casualty in the position found. This protects the head and spine
from further injury. Monitor the ABCs closely.
As injuries permit
A casualty’s injuries may not permit you to put them into the best
position. Continue to support the head and neck and, if needed,
use a head-tilt chin-lift to maintain the open airway. Always think of
the casualty’s comfort when choosing a position.

Fainting
Fainting is a temporary loss of consciousness caused by a shortage
of oxygenated blood to the brain. Common causes of fainting
include:
    •   Fear or anxiety
    •   Lack of fresh air
    •   Severe pain, injury or illness
    •   The sight of blood
    •   An underlying medical problem
    •   Fatigue or hunger
    •   Long periods of standing or sitting
    •   Overheating
A person who has fainted is unconscious. Place them in recovery
position to protect the airway and prevent possible choking. Place
the casualty in a comfortable position as they regain consciousness.




                                                                         59
    First aid for fainting
         •    Ensure a supply of fresh air and loosen tight clothing at the
              neck, chest and waist.
2        •    Make the casualty comfortable as consciousness returns
              and keep them lying down for 10 to 15 minutes. Continue
              to monitor breathing and consciousness.
    Do not assume a person has “just fainted,” unless there is a quick
    recovery. If the recovery is not quick or complete, stay with the
    casualty until medical help takes over.
    If you have to leave to get medical help or you have to give first
    aid to other casualties, turn the casualty into the recovery position
    being as careful as you can if there are any injuries.

    Feeling faint or “impending faint”
    Sometimes when a person is about to faint, there are warning signs.
    The person:
         •    Is pale
         •    Is sweating
         •    Feels sick, nauseous, dizzy or unsteady

    First aid for an impending faint
         1.   Place the casualty on their back.
         2.   Ensure a supply of fresh air—open windows or doors.
         3.   Loosen tight clothing at the neck, chest and waist.
         4.   Stay with the casualty until they has fully recovered.




    60
Decreased level of consciousness (LOC)
Consciousness refers to the level of awareness one has of
themselves and their surroundings. There are different levels of
consciousness ranging from completely conscious to completely
unconscious. Many injuries/illnesses can cause changes in a
                                                                        2
casualty’s level of consciousness, including:
    •    A breathing emergency
    •    A heart attack
    •    A head injury
    •    Poisoning
    •    Shock
    •    Alcohol or drug abuse
    •    Medical condition (epilepsy, diabetes, etc.)
Semi-consciousness and unconsciousness are breathing
emergencies for casualties lying on their back, because the tongue
may fall to the back of the throat and block the airway. Saliva and
other fluids can also pool at the back of the throat and choke the
person.
A progressive loss of consciousness means the casualty’s condition
is getting worse. Always monitor a casualty’s level of consciousness
and note any changes. A first aider can use the acronym AVPU
(alert, verbal, pain, unresponsive) to assess and describe levels of
consciousness.
Decreased consciousness is always an urgent situation. The
person can quickly become unconscious, and this is a breathing
emergency. When you recognize decreased consciousness, get
medical help as quickly as possible.
First aid for unconsciousness
    1.   Start ESM. Perform a scene survey. Call or send for medical
         help as soon as unresponsiveness is determined.




                                                                   61
         2.   Do a primary survey.




2




         3.   Do a secondary survey if necessary.
         4.   Turn the casualty into the recovery position, if injuries
              permit. Give ongoing care.
    If injuries make it necessary for the casualty to be face up, monitor
    breathing continuously. If necessary, hold the airway open. Always
    ensure an open airway.
    Loosen tight clothing at the neck, chest and waist, and continue
    ongoing casualty care until handover. Record any changes in level
    of consciousness and when they happen.
    A decreased level of consciousness also requires urgent medical
    help.

    Multiple casualty management (triage)
    The process of making decisions at an emergency scene where
    multiple people are injured is called triage. In triage, first aiders
    quickly examine all casualties and place them in order of greatest
    need for first aid and for transportation. The idea is to do the most
    good for the greatest number of casualties.




    62
Casualties are categorized into three levels of priority:
    •   Highest priority—casualties who need immediate first aid
        and transportation to medical help
    •   Medium priority—casualties who probably can wait one
        hour for medical help without risk to their lives
                                                                        2
    •   Lowest priority—casualties who can wait and receive first
        aid and transportation last, or casualties who are obviously
        dead




Note: in the event of a lightning strike, where more than one
person is injured, the principles of multiple casualty management
are reversed. Give first aid to unresponsive non-breathing casualties
since the casualties that are still breathing are recovering.




                                                                   63
                     The first aid priorities for injuries
         Priority           Condition                       Causes
     High priority     Foreign body            Choking on food
2    Airway            blocking airway
                       Tongue or fluids        Unconscious, lying on back
                       blocking airway
                       Swollen airway          Allergic reaction, airway infection
     High priority     Injured chest and/or    Chest injury, broken ribs
                       lungs
     Breathing
                       Brain not controlling   Poisoning, drug overdose,
                       breathing properly      stroke, electric shock
                       Not enough oxygen       Not enough oxygen in air,
                       reaching blood          carbon monoxide poisoning
     High priority     Severe bleeding         External bleeding or internal
                                               bleeding
     Circulation
                       Severe shock            Bleeding, serious illness,
                                               poisoning
     Medium            Fractures that could    Broken ribs, shoulder blade
     priority          affect breathing
     Injuries          Fractures—open,         Broken upper leg, pelvis,
     that have         severe or multiple      crushed arm
     potential         bones
     for life-long     Head/spinal injuries    Fall from a six-foot ladder
     disability
                       Critical burns          Critical burns to the hands


     Low priority      Minor fractures         Broken lower leg, lower arm,
                                               hand, finger, etc.
     Minor injuries
     or obviously      Minor bleeding          Bleeding not spurting or free-
     dead                                      flowing
                       Non-critical burns      Moderate degree burns to the
                                               forearms
                       behavioural problems    Grief or panic
                       Obviously dead          Obvious massive injuries, no
                                               pulse or other signs of circulation




    64
Triage sequence of actions
Begin ESM
    •   Determine how many casualties there are in the scene
        survey.                                                             2
Start with the nearest casualty, and move outward
    •   Do a primary survey
    •   Give first aid for life-threatening injuries
    •   If the person is obviously dead, go to the next nearest
        casualty
Repeat step 2 for each casualty
    •   Always move to the next nearest casualty
Categorize
    •   Decide which casualties have the highest priority, second
        priority, and lowest priority.
Arrange transportation
    •   Arrange for the highest priority casualties to be transported
        to medical help as soon as possible
Perform secondary survey
    •   Begin with the highest priority. Give appropriate first aid,
        and move on
Give ongoing care for each casualty until transported
In a multiple casualty situation, constantly assess the casualties and
the situation and make changes to priorities.




                                                                       65
    Lifting and moving
    Always try to give necessary first aid where the casualty is found,
    then wait for the paramedics to move the person. However, there
    are times when this is not possible.
2 You may have to move a casualty when:
         •   There are life-threatening hazards to yourself or the casualty
             e.g. danger from fire, explosion, gas or water
         •   Essential first aid for wounds or other conditions cannot be
             given in the casualty’s present position or location
         •   The casualty must be transported to a medical facility
    If life-threatening hazards make it necessary to move a casualty
    right away, you may need to use a rescue carry.
    In urgent and dangerous situations where casualties are moved with
    less than ideal support for injuries, the casualty’s injuries may be
    made worse by improper movement and handling. The chance of
    further injury can be reduced with proper rescue carry techniques.
    Always move the casualty the shortest possible distance to safety
    and to provide essential first aid. Use bystanders to help you and
    support any injuries the best you can during the move. Keep the
    risks to the casualty, yourself and others to a minimum.

    Rolling Cots (Stretchers)
    If your workplace uses rolling cots to transport injured workers, it is
    crucial that you have proper training on how to operate and handle
    the cot before you use it. Failure can result in the cot tipping or
    dropping, and causing further injury.

    Occupational Hazards
    When working in and around occupational hazards such as confined
    spaces, trenches, machinery, and hazardous gases, workers
    should know the proper response protocols. Ensure you have the
    appropriate training for the type or rescue you will be undertaking
    as well as the proper equipment to keep yourself safe while
    rescuing another worker.




    66
Helicopters
In some locations, a helicopter may be sent to transport an injured
worker to hospital. Anyone working around helicopters should have
proper training and everyone should follow these guidelines:
                                                                             2
    •   Never approach without permission of the pilot or crew
        chief
    •   Always follow directions from the pilot or crew chief on from
        which direction to approach the aircraft
    •   Know the restricted and danger areas around the aircraft
        and remain outside these areas unless you need to enter
    •   The tail and tail-rotor of the helicopter poses a significant
        danger and should be avoided

Transporting a casualty
Generally speaking, first aid providers will not transport casualties
to the hospital, leaving that to ambulances. However, there are
instances where you may choose to transport someone to the
hospital yourself.
    •   The injuries are minor and the casualty is stable
    •   The response time for EMS to arrive is prohibitively long
        (i.e. remote areas)
    •   If the above conditions are met, and the casualty is a family
        member or close friend—do not transport strangers to the
        hospital in your own vehicle whenever possible

Care during transport
Every effort must be taken to ensure that injuries are not made
worse while transporting a casualty to a medical facility. Take steps
to keep the casualty comfortable and in a position that will not
cause unneeded movement of injured limbs. Have another person
accompany you to monitor the casualty if possible.
 Do not drive fast. If a casualty needs to be transported quickly, an
ambulance should be called. Follow all local traffic laws. Find the
smoothest route possible to make the ride as comfortable
as possible.


                                                                        67
    Meeting an ambulance crew enroute
    Some work locations are isolated and response times of EMS are
    extended. In these instances, where provincial regulations permit,
2   casualties can be transported toward medical help with the plan to
    meet an ambulance part way. When selecting a meeting point, be
    sure the location is clear to both sides and it is easily found. Identify
    any landmarks or businesses that can aid in finding the location. In
    the event you arrive before the ambulance, contact EMS and get
    an update on the ambulance location before moving the meeting
    location.

    Lifting techniques and proper body mechanics
    Moving any casualty from an emergency scene poses dangers to
    the rescuer as well as the casualty. If the casualty must be moved,
    select the method that will pose the least risk to the casualty and
    to you. You can be of little help to a casualty if you injure yourself in
    the rescue.
    Using incorrect body mechanics in lifting or moving a casualty may
    leave the rescuer suffering muscle strains. Use the following lifting
    guidelines:
         •   Stand close to the object to be lifted.
         •   Bend your knees, not your waist.
         •   Tilt the object so that you can put one hand under the
             edge or corner closest to you.
         •   Place your other hand under the opposite side or corner,
             getting a good grip on the object.
         •   Use your leg muscles to lift, and keep your back straight.
         •   When turning, turn your feet first; don’t twist your body.
    When lowering the object, reverse the procedure.




    68
                                                                           2




Rescue carries
A rescue carry is an emergency method of moving a casualty over a
short distance to safety, shelter or to transportation. Select the type
of carry based on the circumstances.
    •   The size and weight of the casualty relative to the rescuer
    •   The number of rescuers available to assist
    •   The type of injury
    •   The distance to move the casualty
Whenever possible, ask one or more bystanders to help you. When
help is available:
    •   Remain with the casualty
    •   Give instructions to the bystanders about what to do and
        what safety precautions to take
    •   Fully coordinate the rescue activities




                                                                      69
    Drag carry
    This carry is used by the single rescuer to drag a casualty who is
    either lying on their back or in a sitting position. The drag carry
    provides maximum protection to the head and neck, and therefore
2   should be used when you are moving a casualty with this type of
    injury.
    If time permits, tie the casualty’s wrists together across their chest
    before dragging.




    To perform a drag carry:
         1.   Stand at the casualty’s head facing their feet.
         2.   Crouch down and ease your hands under the casualty’s
              shoulders. Grasp the clothing on each side. Support the
              casualty’s head between your forearms to stop movement.
         3.   Drag the casualty backward only as far as necessary for their
              safety.
    As an alternate method, the first aider can use a blanket to support
    and drag the casualty.
    Because of the risk of aggravating any
    injuries, only use drag carries in the
    most extreme cases when there is an
    immediate threat to life.




    70
Human crutch
If a leg or foot is injured, help the casualty to walk on their good leg
while you give support to the injured side.
                         1.       Take the weight of the casualty’s
                         injured side on your shoulders by placing
                                                                           2
                         the casualty’s arm (on the injured side)
                         around your neck and grasping the wrist
                         firmly.
                         2.       Reach around the casualty’s back
                         with your free hand, and grasp the clothing
                         at the waist.
                         3.       Tell the casualty to step off with
                         you, each using the inside foot. This lets
                         you, the rescuer; take the casualty’s weight
                         on the injured side.
                         Chair carry
                          The chair carry enables two rescuers to
                          carry a conscious or unconscious casualty
                          through narrow passages and up and down
stairs. Do not use this carry for casualties with suspected neck or
back injuries. Specially designed rescue chairs are available and
should be used for this type of carry.
If the casualty is unconscious or helpless:
    1.   Place an unconscious casualty on a chair by sliding the back
         of the chair under their legs and buttocks, and along the
         lower back.
    2.   Strap their upper body and arms to the back of the chair.




                                                                      71
         3.   Two rescuers carry the chair, one at the front and one at the
              back. The rescuer at the back crouches and grasps the back
              of the chair, while the rescuer at the front crouches between
              the casualty’s knees and grasps the front chair legs near the
2             floor.
         4.   The rescuers walk out-of-step.
    Going down stairs
         •    The casualty faces forward
         •    The front rescuer faces the casualty
         •    A third person should act as a guide and support the front
              rescuer in case they lose their footing
    Extremity carry
    Use the extremity carry when you don’t have a chair and do not
    suspect fractures of the trunk, head, or spine.
                                   1.   One rescuer passes their hands
                                        under the casualty’s armpits,
                                        and grasps the casualty’s wrists,
                                        crossing them over their chest.
                                   2.   The second rescuer crouches with
                                        their back between the casualty’s
                                        knees and grasps each leg just
                                        above the knee.
                                   3.   The rescuers step off on opposite
                                        feet—walking out-of-step is
                                        smoother for the casualty.


    Blanket lift with four bearers
         1.   Roll the blanket or rug lengthwise for half its width. Position
              bearers at the head and
              feet to keep the head,
              neck and body in line.
              Place the rolled edge
              along the casualty’s
              injured side.


    72
    2.   Kneel at the casualty’s shoulder and position another bearer
         at the waist to help log-roll the casualty onto the uninjured
         side. Turn the casualty as a unit so the casualty’s body is not
         twisted.
    3.   Roll the casualty back over the blanket roll to lay face up on     2
         the blanket. Unroll the blanket and then roll the edges of
                                               the blanket to each
                                               side of the casualty.
                                               Get ready to lift the
                                               casualty—have the
                                               bearers grip the rolls
                                               at the head and
                                               shoulders, and at the
                                               hip and legs.
    4.   Keep the blanket tight as the casualty is lifted and placed
         on the stretcher.
Before using a blanket,
test it to ensure that it
will carry the casualty’s
weight. Do not use
this lift if neck or back
injuries are suspected.

Stretchers
There may be times when medical help cannot be contacted, or
for other reasons, cannot come to the scene. When this happens,
transport the casualty to medical help. If the casualty can’t walk, or
if the injury or illness allows only the gentlest movement, a stretcher
should be used.

Principles for stretcher use
Complete all essential first aid and immobilization before moving
the casualty onto a stretcher.
    •    Bring the blanketed and padded stretcher to the casualty,
         rather than moving the casualty to the stretcher.
    •    As the first aider in charge, take the position that permits
         you to watch and control the most sensitive area of the
         body, usually at the head and shoulders, or the injured part.

                                                                       73
         •    Tell the bearers what each is expected to do. If the move is
              difficult, and time permits, it’s a good idea to practice with
              a simulated casualty. This reduces risks and reassures the
              conscious casualty.
2        •    Test an improvised stretcher with someone equal to or
              heavier than the casualty to ensure that it will hold.
         •    Check the clearance of an improvised stretcher to ensure
              that it will pass through hallways, doors and stairways
              without harm to the casualty. Use clear commands to
              ensure smooth, coordinated movements.
    Commercial stretchers
    The most common of the commercial
    stretchers is the rigid-pole, canvas
    stretcher. It has hinged bracing bars at
    right angles between the rigid poles at
    either end that must be locked in the
    extended position before the stretcher is
    used.
    Improvised stretchers
    If a commercially prepared stretcher is not
    available, you can improvise one by using
    two rigid poles and a blanket, clothing or
    grain sacks. Do not use non-rigid stretchers
    for casualties with suspected head or
    spinal injuries.
    Improvised blanket stretcher
         1.   Place the blanket flat on the ground and place a pole one-
              third of the way from one end. Fold the one-third length of
              blanket over the pole.
         2.   Place the second pole parallel to the first so that it is on the
              doubled part of the blanket, about 15 cm (6 inches) from
              the doubled edge.




    74
    3.   Fold the remaining blanket over the two poles. The
         casualty’s weight on the blanket holds the folds in place.


                                                                              2




Improvised jacket stretcher
A non-rigid stretcher can also be improvised from two jackets and
two or four poles.
    1.   Button and zipper the
         jackets closed and pull the
         sleeves inside out so that
         the sleeves are inside. Lay
         the jackets on the ground
         so that the top edge of one
         jacket meets the bottom
         edge of the other.
    2.   Pass the poles through the
         sleeves of the two jackets on
         either side to complete the
         stretcher.
    3.   If the casualty is tall, prepare another jacket as before and
         add it to the stretcher with the head of the jacket towards
         the middle.




                                                                         75
    Four-bearer method—no blanket
         1.   All bearers kneel on their left knees, three on one side of
              the casualty and one on the other, as shown below. Bearer
              4 helps in lifting and lowering the casualty, and also places
2             the stretcher under the casualty.
         2.   Bearer 4 joins hands with bearers 1 and 2. When assured
              that each bearer has a firm hold on the casualty, bearer 1
              directs the others to “Get ready to lift” and then gives the
              command “Lift.” Lift the casualty smoothly to the height of
              the raised knees.




         3.   On bearer 1’s command “Rest,” the casualty is gently laid
              on the raised knees of bearers 1, 2 and 3.
         4.   Bearer 1 tells bearer 4 to position the stretcher. Bearer 4
              then resumes their position supporting the casualty by
              linking their hands with one from each of bearers 1 and 2.
              Position the stretcher.
         5.   When everyone is in position, bearer 1 instructs the team
              to, “Get ready to lower” and then, “lower.” The team
              lowers the casualty
              gently onto the
              stretcher. Secure the
              casualty to the
              stretcher.




    76
Three-bearer method, no blanket
The three-bearer method is essentially the same as the four-bearer
method, except the first aider and one bearer share the weight on
one side of the casualty. The third bearer links hands with the first
aider from the opposite side to take up the weight of the trunk.            2
The casualty is lifted and rested on the bearers’ knees while the
stretcher is positioned and bearer 3 links hands again with the first
aider to help lower the casualty to the stretcher.

Carrying a stretcher
A stretcher should be carried by four bearers. As the first aider in
charge, decide on the carrying method and give clear instructions
to the bearers. After the casualty has been strapped to the
stretcher, position yourself so you can watch the casualty and at the
same time give direction to the other bearers.
Assign the remaining bearers (depending whether you are two or
four) to respective corners or ends of the stretcher. Bearers crouch
by the carrying handles of the stretcher, facing in the direction of
travel.
    •   When the bearers have a firm footing and a good grip on
        the stretcher, give the command, “Get ready to lift,” and
        then, “Lift.”
    •   Ask the bearers if they are ready. When they are, give the
        command, “Go forward.”
    •   When it is necessary to stop, give the commands “Stop,”
        Get ready to lower,” and then, “Lower.”
To ensure the smoothest carry for the casualty:
    •   Four bearers carrying a stretcher step off together on the
        foot nearest the stretcher and keep in step
    •   Two bearers step off on opposite feet and walk out-of-step




                                                                       77
    Head-first carry
    Although stretcher casualties are usually carried feet first, certain
    conditions call for a head-first carry:

2        •    Leg injuries during a long downhill carry or when
              descending stairs, a head-first carry decreases pressure on
              the lower limbs and minimizes discomfort
         •    Uphill carries and going up stairs if there are no injuries to
              the legs—a head-first carry decreases blood flow to the
              casualty’s head and is more comfortable
         •    Loading an ambulance or transferring the casualty to a
              bed—it is safer to do this head first, and easier to watch the
              casualty
    Obstacles
    When crossing uneven ground, a stretcher should be carried by
    four bearers and kept as level as possible. Bearers must adjust
    the height of the stretcher to compensate for dips and rises in the
    terrain.
    Crossing a wall
    Avoid crossing a wall, even if it means a longer carry. Where a wall
    must be crossed, follow these steps:
         1.   Lift the stretcher onto the wall so that the front handles are
              just over it. The rear bearers hold the stretcher level while
              the front bearers cross the wall. All lift together and the
              stretcher is moved forward until the rear handles rest on the
              wall.
         2.   The front bearers hold the stretcher level until the rear
              bearers have crossed the wall and resumed their positions
              at the rear of the stretcher.
         3.   The stretcher is then lowered to continue the journey.




    78
Extrication
Extrication is the process of freeing casualties who are trapped
or entangled in a vehicle or collapsed structure and cannot free
themselves. Provide as much support as possible to the casualty
during extrication. Whenever possible, give essential first aid and        2
immobilize the injuries before the casualty is moved.
When there is an immediate danger and you are alone and must
move a casualty from a vehicle, proceed as follows:
                            1. If necessary, disentangle the
                            person’s feet from the vehicle and bring
                            the feet toward the exit. Ease your
                            forearm under the person’s armpit on
                            the exit side, extending your hand to
                            support the chin.
                            2. Ease the person’s head gently
                            backward to rest on your shoulder while
                            keeping the neck as rigid as possible.
                            3. Ease your other forearm under the
                            armpit on the opposite side and hold
                            the wrist of the casualty’s arm which is
                            nearest the exit.
                             4. Establish a firm footing and swing
                             around with the person, keeping as
                             much rigidity in the neck as possible.
                             Drag the casualty from the vehicle to
                             a safe distance with as little twisting as
                             possible.




                                                                      79
Chapter 3
                                Airway and
                                Breathing
                                Emergencies




•   Hypoxia
•   Effective and ineffective
    breathing
•   Inhalation injuries
•   Breathing emergencies
    caused by illness
•   Asthma
•   Severe allergic reaction
•   Choking
  Airway and breathing emergencies




  Chapter 3 Airway and breathing emergencies
  When a person’s breathing is affected through injury or illness, their
  life can be in immediate danger. As a first aider, you have to be
  able to recognize a breathing emergency very quickly and know
  what first aid to give—the casualty’s life may depend on it.

3 Hypoxia
  Choking and breathing emergencies cause a lack of oxygen in the
  blood, a condition called hypoxia. This can damage vital tissues and
  eventually cause death. The causes of hypoxia are grouped under
  three headings:
       1. Lack of oxygen —for example:
           •    The oxygen level is low, such as at a high altitude
           •    The oxygen is displaced by other gases, such as a
                build-up of silo gas in a grain silo
           •    The oxygen in a small space is used up—for instance in
                a confined space
       2. Blocked airway—for example:
           •    A casualty chokes on a foreign object, such as food
           •    An unconscious casualty’s airway is blocked by their
                tongue
           •    A casualty’s airway becomes swollen due to an allergic
                reaction
       3. Abnormal heart and lung function—where the heart and
          lungs are not working properly due to:
           •    An illness such as pneumonia or congestive heart
                failure
           •    An injury preventing effective breathing
           •    A drug overdose or poisoning




  82
                                          Airway and breathing emergencies




Effective and ineffective breathing
The normal breathing rate varies for infants, children and adults. A
breathing rate that is too slow or too fast is a sign of a breathing
emergency. Breathing rhythm refers to the interval between
breaths. In normal breathing, the intervals are even and breathing
is effortless—this is regular breathing. Breathing depth refers to the
amount of air moved in and out of the lungs with each breath. Signs
of effective breathing include:                                              3
    •   Breathing that is quiet
    •   Equal expansion of both sides of the chest when the person
        inhales
    •   The person is alert and relaxed
    •   Skin colour is normal
    •   Speaking without taking a breath every few words
When a person is not getting enough oxygen, the body responds
by breathing faster and deeper. Signs of ineffective breathing
include:
    •   The casualty is struggling for breath or gasping for air
    •   Breathing rate is too fast or too slow
    •   Breathing rhythm is irregular
    •   Breathing depth is too shallow or too deep
    •   Breathing is noisy or raspy
    •   The person is “getting tired” from trying to breathe
    •   The person is sweating
    •   Decreased level of consciousness
    •   The lips, ears and fingernail beds turn blue—called cyanosis
    •   Chest movement may be abnormal




                                                                       83
    Airway and breathing emergencies




    First aid for ineffective breathing
    Always send or go for medical help at the first sign of a breathing
    emergency.
    The first aid for ineffective breathing has two parts:
         1.   Give first aid for the injury or condition and position the
              responsive casualty in the semi-sitting position if possible
3        2.   If breathing stops the casualty will become unresponsive,
              get medical help immediately and begin CPR
    This table lists some of the causes of breathing emergencies. To
    give first aid, first determine the cause of the breathing emergency,
    and then decide on the best first aid actions.

     Causes of airway and breathing emergencies
         Injuries        Medical conditions               Poisoning
     Broken ribs        Asthma                     Inhaled poison – e.g.
                                                   carbon monoxide or
                                                   hydrogen sulfide
     Near drowning      Stroke                     Swallowed poison –
                                                   E.g. household cleaners or
                                                   medication overdose
     Knife or gunshot Allergic reaction            Injected poison – e.g. bee
     wound                                         sting
     Burns to the       Pneumonia
     face or airway
     Head injury        Congestive heart failure

     Compression        Emphysema/bronchitis
     of the chest
     preventing
     chest expansion

    Inhalation injuries
    Inhalation injuries happen when the casualty inhales hot steam or
    hot (superheated) air, smoke or poisonous chemicals.




    84
                                           Airway and breathing emergencies




Signs and symptoms of inhalation injuries include signs of shock:
    •    Dizziness, restlessness, confusion
    •    Pallor or cyanosis
    •    Abnormal breathing rate or depth
Together with a history of fire and:
    •    Noisy breathing                                                      3
    •    Pain during breathing
    •    Burns on the face, especially the mouth and nose
    •    Singed hair on the face or head
    •    Sooty or smoky smell on breath
    •    Sore throat, hoarseness, barking cough, difficulty
         swallowing

First aid for an inhalation injury
    1.   Perform a scene survey and do a primary survey. Give first
         aid for the ABCs.
    2.   Place a conscious casualty in the semi-sitting position and
         loosen tight clothing at the neck, chest and waist.
    3.   If breathing stops, begin CPR starting with compressions.
    4.   Give ongoing casualty care until handover to medical help.

Breathing emergencies caused by illness
Illnesses that can lead to severe breathing difficulties include
asthma, allergies, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (e.g.
emphysema), congestive heart failure, stroke and pneumonia.

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease is a term used to describe
a group of respiratory conditions such as chronic bronchitis and
emphysema. Casualties present with on-going shortness of breath
and appear to be struggling to breathe. Some people may use
supplemental oxygen delivered by nasal prongs from a small
canister they carry when they have a more serious case of COPD.



                                                                        85
    Airway and breathing emergencies




    Asthma
    Asthma is a reactive airway illness in which the person has repeated
    shortness of breath, characterized by wheezing and coughing. A
    mild asthma attack is not a health emergency and can be managed
    by the casualty. A severe asthma attack can be fatal and requires
    immediate first aid. In response to a ‘trigger’ the person’s airway
3   can spasm, swell and secrete thick mucus, which narrows the airway
    passage.
    Some common triggers that can cause asthma are:
         •    Colds, upper airway infections
         •    Pet dander
         •    Insect bites, stings
         •    Foods
         •    Pollen, paint and smoke
    Signs and symptoms of a severe asthmatic attack:
         •    Shortness of breath with obvious trouble breathing
         •    Coughing or wheezing
         •    Fast, shallow breathing
         •    Casualty sitting upright trying to breathe
         •    Bluish colour in the face (cyanosis )
         •    Anxiety, tightness in the chest
         •    Fast pulse rate, shock
         •    Restlessness at first, and then fatigue

    First aid for a severe asthma attack
         1.   Perform a scene survey and a primary survey; send for
              medical help.
         2.   Place the casualty in the most comfortable position for
              breathing. This is usually sitting upright with arms resting on
              a table.
         3.   Help the casualty take prescribed medication.
         4.   Give ongoing casualty care.
         5.   If the unconscious casualty stops breathing, begin CPR.
    86
                                         Airway and breathing emergencies




A person with asthma may carry medication in the form of a:
    •    Metered-dose inhaler (MDI)
    •    Turbuhaler
    •    Diskus®
Usually the person can give themselves this medication without
help. If the person needs help, a first aider can assist.
An inhaler delivers a pre-measured amount of medication.
                                                                            3
Always read and follow the manufacturer’s instructions. Check the
prescription label to confirm the casualty’s name and expiry date.

To assist with a Metered Dose Inhaler
The metered dose inhaler (or “puffer”) is the more
common method of delivering medication for
asthma.
    1.   Shake the container, then remove the cap.          Check your
    2.   Tell the casualty to breathe out completely,        applicable
                                                             workplace
                                                            legislation/
                                                            regulations




    3.   Tell the casualty to breathe in slowly and deeply—as the
         casualty does, the MDI will be pressed to release the
         medication. The MDI can be in the mouth, or just in front of
         the mouth.




                                                                      87
    Airway and breathing emergencies




         4.   Tell the casualty to hold their breath for 10 seconds so the
              medication can spread out in the lungs. Then tell them to
              breathe normally, so the medication won’t be expelled. If
              more doses are needed, wait at least 30-60 seconds before
              repeating these steps.

    Spacers (Aerochamber®)
3 When the medication comes out of the inhaler, it may be deposited
    on the back of the throat and not reach the lungs or the casualty
    may be gasping for air and unable to hold their breath. To deal
    with this, use a spacer if available. It traps the particles of the spray,
    allowing the casualty to inhale more effectively over several breaths.
    Spacers make it simple to inhale the medication, and should always
    be used when available. Small children and other casualties who
    have difficulties coordinating proper inhalation with the release of
    the medication will often have spacers with them.




    It allows them to inhale two or three times before the medication is
    completely dispelled. A mask can be attached to the device to
    make taking the medication easier.




    88
                                           Airway and breathing emergencies




If the casualty complains of throat irritation after using the inhaler,
have them gargle or rinse the mouth with water.

Severe allergic reaction
An allergic reaction occurs when the immune system reacts to a
substance the body encounters. Most allergies are annoying but
not dangerous.
Anaphylaxis is a severe allergic reaction which usually happens
                                                                               3
when a substance to which the casualty is very sensitive enters the
body, although it can also be caused by exercise or have no known
cause. Anaphylaxis can happen within seconds, minutes or hours of
a substance entering the body. As a rule, the sooner the casualty’s
body reacts, the worse the reaction will be. Anaphylaxis is a serious
medical emergency that needs urgent medical attention.
Common early signs and symptoms of an allergy may include itchy
flushed skin with hives; sneezing and a runny nose; coughing.
If it’s a severe reaction there may be swelling of the face and neck,
especially the lips and tongue. Breathing may become difficult if
the swelling is internal too. There may be nausea and vomiting and
the casualty may be anxious and feeling sense of impending doom
as their blood pressure drops and they go into shock. This is a true
medical emergency and requires immediate first aid.
First aid for a severe allergic reaction
    1.   Perform a scene survey and a primary survey. Send for
         medical help.
    2.   Place the casualty in the most comfortable position for
         breathing—usually sitting upright.
    3.   Assist the casualty with their medication, usually this is an
         epinephrine auto-injector.
    4.   Give ongoing casualty care.
It is important to be familiar with, and follow the
manufacturer’s instructions, which is located on the
side of the auto-injector.                                 Check your
Check the expiry date. If the only auto-injector is an      applicable
expired product, it may still save a life and should        workplace
be administered anyway, if the indicated liquid            legislation/
remains clear.                                             regulations
                                                                          89
    Airway and breathing emergencies




    To use the auto-injector:
         1.   Remove the EpiPen® from the storage tube. Hold it firmly
              with the orange tip downward. Remove the blue safety
              release.



3




         2.   Use the auto-injector on only the fleshy part of the
              mid-outer thigh. Auto-injectors can be given through
              lightweight clothing.
         3.   Press the orange tip of the EpiPen® firmly into the mid-
              outer thigh until the unit activates.
         4.   Hold the auto-injector in place for several seconds, then
              pull it straight out.




    90
                                          Airway and breathing emergencies




    5.   After the injection, keep the casualty warm and avoid any
         exertion. Call 9-1-1 as soon as you have given the first dose.




                                                                             3



If the casualty shows no improvement within 5 minutes or if their
condition deteriorates before help arrives a second dose may
be given if it is available. This will require a second EpiPen®.
Individuals who are feeling faint or dizzy because of impending
shock should be placed flat on their back unless they are vomiting
or experiencing respiratory distress.
It is important that the casualty does not sit or stand immediately
as this could cause a drop in blood pressure. The medication will
begin to wear off within 10 to 20 minutes—get medical help right
away.
If you or anyone else is injected by mistake, get medical help.
Follow manufacturer’s directions for proper care of the used device.
Put the used unit back in the storage container and take it to the
hospital with the casualty.




                                                                       91
    Airway and breathing emergencies




    Choking
    A person chokes when the airway is partly or completely blocked
    and airflow to the lungs is reduced or cut off. The choking casualty
    either has trouble breathing or cannot breathe at all.

    Open and clear airway
3




    Partly blocked airway




    Completely blocked airway




    92
                                       Airway and breathing emergencies




                      Causes of choking
 Foreign objects           The tongue                 Swelling
Infants and         Tongue falls to the back of   Injury to the
children—food,      the throat when lying on      throat area
toys, buttons,      back                          causes swelling
coins, etc.                                       of the airway
                                                                          3
Adults—           Saliva, blood or vomit          Illness causes
consuming drinks pools in the throat              swelling,
quickly with food                                 e.g. allergic
in your mouth                                     reaction, asthma,
                                                  epiglottis, croup
In elderly                                        Swollen airway
people—food,
pills


With good air exchange, the obstruction is mild and person can
still cough forcefully, breathe and speak. With poor air exchange,
the obstruction is severe and the person cannot cough forcefully,
has trouble breathing, or cannot speak. With a completely blocked
airway, there is no air exchange—coughing, breathing and speaking
are impossible.
When the air supply to the lungs is cut off, the person’s face
immediately becomes red or “flushed”. Shortly after, as the oxygen
in the body is used up, the face becomes grey and the lips and ear
lobes become blue. The person then becomes unconscious and
eventually the heart stops beating.




                                                                    93
    Airway and breathing emergencies




                            Signs of choking
              Mild obstruction                Severe obstruction
     Able to speak                        Not able to speak
     Signs of distress—eyes show          Signs of distress—eyes show
     fear                                 fear
3    Forceful coughing                    Weak or no coughing
     Wheezing and gagging                 High-pitched noise or no
     between coughs                       noise when trying to breathe
     Red or “flushed” face                Grey face and blue lips and
                                          ears

    First aid for choking
    First aid for a choking adult or child
         1.   Perform a scene survey.
         2.   If the casualty can cough forcefully, speak or breathe, tell
              them to try to cough up the object. If a mild obstruction
              lasts for a few minutes, get medical help.
    If you think there might be a severe obstruction, check by asking,
    “Are you choking?” If the casualty cannot cough forcefully, speak or
    breathe, use back blows followed by abdominal thrusts to remove
    the blockage.
         1.   Give back blows and abdominal thrusts:
         2.   Support the casualty and give up to five blows between the
              shoulder blades using the heel of your hand.
         3.   If the obstruction is not
              cleared, step behind the
              casualty ready to support
              them if they become
              unconscious.
         4.   Make a fist, place it on
              the casualty’s abdomen
              at the belly button, in
              line with the hip bones.
              Grasp the fist with the
              other hand and give five

    94
                                           Airway and breathing emergencies




         forceful inward and upward abdominal thrusts.
    5.   If the object is not removed, repeat back blows and
         abdominal thrusts.
If the casualty becomes unconscious
    1.   Lower them to the ground. Call
         for medical help and get an AED if
         available.                                                           3
    2.   Begin chest compressions
         immediately. After the first 30
         compressions, check the mouth.
         Remove any foreign object you
         can see. Try to give 2 breaths.
         If air does not go in, continue
         to give chest compressions and
         inspecting the mouth before ventilations.

First aid for a choking casualty much larger than the
rescuer
If a choking casualty is very large or is in the
late stages of pregnancy, give back blows as
normal, followed by chest thrusts.
    1.   While supporting the casualty, give
         up to five back blows between the
         shoulder blades, using the heel of your
         hand.
    2.   If the obstruction is not cleared, stand
         behind the casualty.
    3.   Keep your arms horizontal and snug up
         under their armpits.
    4.   Place your fist against the lower half of
         the breastbone, thumb-side in.
    5.   Hold your fist with your other hand. Pull
         inward forcefully.
    6.   Continue giving back blows and chest
         thrusts until either the object is removed
         or the casualty becomes unconscious.

                                                                        95
    Airway and breathing emergencies




    Choking adult – self-help
    If you begin to choke on an object you may have to clear your own
    airway.
         1.   If there are people around, get their attention, do not
              isolate yourself from others.
         2.   Try to cough up the object.
3        3.   Give yourself abdominal thrusts until you can cough
              forcefully, breathe or speak.
    A second method is to use a solid object like the back of a chair, a
    table or the edge of a counter.
         •    Position yourself so the object is just above your hips.
         •    Press forcefully to produce an abdominal thrust.




    96
                                        Airway and breathing emergencies




How abdominal thrusts work
When you choke on something, your body tries to unblock your
airway by coughing.
Abdominal thrusts try to do the same thing with an artificial cough.
The illustration below shows how an abdominal thrust creates a
cough.
An abdominal thrust pushes the diaphragm up towards the lungs              3
very quickly. This forces the air from the lungs up the airway and
hopefully blows the obstruction out.
For the best effect, the fist has to be in the correct place. Keep
your forearms off the abdomen and make each thrust a strong and
sudden movement.




                                                                     97
    Airway and breathing emergencies




    First aid for a choking casualty in a wheelchair
    If you can reach around from behind the wheelchair, give back
    blows as normal, and abdominal or chest thrusts. If you cannot
    reach around the wheelchair:
         •   Position the wheelchair against a wall.
         •   Put the wheelchair brake on.
3




         •   If possible, carefully lean the casualty forward and support
             the shoulders. Perform five back blows between the
             shoulder blades, using the heel of your hand.
         •   Put the heel of one hand, with the other on top, in the
             middle of the abdomen and give up to five sudden, inward/
             upward thrusts.
         •   Alternatively, place the heel of one hand on the center of
             the breastbone and give firm chest thrusts.
         •   Repeat back blows and abdominal or chest thrusts until the
             object is removed or the casualty becomes unconscious.
    If a doctor, physiotherapist or other health professional has shown
    you a different way of giving abdominal thrusts to a person in your
    care, use the recommended method.




    98
                                         Airway and breathing emergencies




If the casualty becomes unconscious, take them out of the
wheelchair.
   •   Call for medical help and get an AED.




                                                                            3




   •   Pull the casualty forward supporting them as best as you
       can and lower them to the ground.
   •   Roll the casualty to the floor to a face-up position.




   •   Begin chest compressions immediately. After the first
       30 compressions, check the mouth. Remove any foreign
       object you can see. Try to give 2 breaths and continue to
       give chest compressions and inspecting the mouth before
       ventilations.




                                                                      99
    Airway and breathing emergencies




    First aid for a choking infant
    An infant is choking when they suddenly have trouble breathing,
    coughing, gagging, with high-pitched, noisy breathing.
          1.   Perform a scene survey and primary survey.
          2.   If the baby can cough forcefully or breathe let the baby try
               to cough up the object. If a mild obstruction lasts for more
3              than a few minutes, send for medical help.




          3.   If the baby cannot cough forcefully, cannot breathe, makes
               a high-pitched noise when trying to breathe or starts to turn
               blue, begin back blows and chest thrusts.
          4.   Secure the baby between your forearms and turn them face
               down.




    100
                                     Airway and breathing emergencies




5.   With the baby’s head lower than the body, use the heel of
     your hand to give five forceful back blows between the
     shoulder blades.




                                                                        3




6.   Turn the baby face-up and give five chest thrusts.




7.   Keep giving back blows and chest thrusts until either the
     airway is cleared or the baby becomes unconscious.
8.   If the baby becomes unconscious, send for medical
     help. Begin chest compressions immediately.
     After the first 30 compressions, check the mouth. Remove
     any foreign object you can see. Try to give 2 breaths and
     continue to give chest compressions and inspecting the
     mouth before ventilations




                                                                 101
Chapter 4
                              Cardiovascular
                              Emergencies and
                              Cardiopulmonary
                              Resuscitation (CPR)




•   Cardiovascular disease
•   Chain of survival ®
•   Angina and heart attack
•   Stroke and transient
    ischemic attack (TIA)
•   Cardiac arrest
•   Cardiopulmonary
    resuscitation (CPR)
•   Automated external
    defibrillation - (AED)
    Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR




    Chapter 4 Cardiovascular emergencies and
    Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR)
    Cardiovascular disease
    Cardiovascular disease is one of the leading causes of death of
    adults in Canada. Some of these deaths could be prevented if
    appropriate first aid was given. This chapter describes the first aid
    for cardiovascular emergencies, including
4         •   First aid for angina/heart attack
          •   First aid for stroke/TIA
          •   First aid for cardiac arrest, which is CPR

    High blood pressure
    Blood pressure is the pressure
    of the blood against the inside
    walls of the blood vessels.
    Blood pressure goes up and
    down naturally. When a person
    is excited or emotionally
    stressed, blood pressure goes
    up, but it usually comes down
    once the excitement has passed. In some people, their blood
    pressure stays high all the time. This condition of constant high
    blood pressure is called hypertension.
    Over time, hypertension damages the tissues of the cardiovascular
    system. The walls of the blood vessels become thick and lose their
    elasticity and the heart becomes enlarged. The changes caused by
    high blood pressure increase the risk of stroke, heart attack, kidney,
    and eye problems. Unfortunately, hypertension does not always
    give warning signals—you may feel perfectly well but still have high
    blood pressure. This is why it is often called the “silent killer.”
    If you have concerns about your blood pressure, you should speak
    with your primary health-care provider. Blood pressure machines
    located in pharmacies can help you monitor your blood pressure,
    but should never be used as a means of self-diagnosis.



    104
                                      Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR




Narrowing of the arteries
Arteries are the blood vessels that carry blood away from the heart.
They become diseased when fatty deposits build up inside them,
making the passage for blood narrower. This process of depositing
fat and narrowing of the arteries is called atherosclerosis. In the
coronary arteries, which carry oxygenated blood to the heart, it is
called coronary artery disease.


                                                                           4




As an artery gets narrower, less and less blood can get through.
When the artery gets too narrow, the tissues on the other side of
the narrowing don’t get enough oxygenated blood to function
normally. Although the signs and symptoms of hardening of
the arteries usually don’t appear until middle age or later,
atherosclerosis often begins in childhood.

Angina
Angina occurs when the blood supply feeding the heart muscle
becomes limited due to narrowed, damaged, or blocked arteries.
When the heart works harder and needs more blood (e.g. when
you run for a bus or shovel snow), it cannot get enough blood. This
causes pain or discomfort in the chest, which may spread to the
neck, jaw, shoulders, and arms. Angina pain typically doesn’t last
long, and goes away if the person rests and takes their prescribed
medication.




                                                                    105
    Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR




    Heart attack
    A heart attack happens when heart muscle tissue dies because its
    supply of blood has been cut off. A heart attack can feel just like
    angina, except the pain doesn’t go away with rest and medication.
    If the heart attack damages the heart’s electrical system, or if a lot
    of the heart muscle is affected, the heart may stop beating properly.
    This is cardiac arrest.

    Risk Factors
4 A number of factors increase the risks for cardiovascular disease,
    heart attack, and stroke. These can be broken down into modifiable
    and non-modifiable risks.
    The modifiable risk factors can lead to dyslipidemia (increased
    deposits of fats), obesity, diabetes, and high blood pressure.

            Non-modifiable                         Modifiable
     •    Age                            •   Smoking
     •    Genetic History                •   Poor diet
     •    Sex                            •   Lack of exercise
                                         •   Increased stress
    Modifiable risks can be reduced through lifestyle changes.

    Angina and heart attack
    Early recognition and denial
    The first step is recognizing a cardiovascular emergency. It’s difficult
    to accept that someone is having a heart attack and could die very
    soon, especially if the person is a family member or a close friend.
    The casualty is often denying anything serious is happening as well,
    so it’s easy to accept their reassurances.
    On average, casualties take several hours to get to a hospital from
    the time they first start feeling poorly. It is this wasted time that
    prevents many lives from being saved. When someone complains of
    chest pain, shortness of breath and looks odd you should consider
    it a serious problem—that’s early recognition, and call for medical
    help. Getting the casualty to the hospital quickly gives them the
    best chance for survival.
    106
                                        Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR




Chain of Survival®
CPR is often what comes to mind when people think of first aid for
a heart attack or cardiac arrest. But CPR is only part of the picture.
There are five steps that are important when helping someone with
heart problems.


                1.     Immediate recognition of a cardiovascular
                       emergency and activation of the community
                       emergency medical services (EMS) system.
                       This means calling for help quickly.                    4
                2.     Early CPR with an emphasis on chest
                       compressions.
                3.     Rapid defibrillation.
                4.     Effective advanced life support.
                5.     Integrated post-cardiac arrest care.
                Each of the steps is as important as the others. Time
                is a vital ingredient. To give a casualty in cardiac
                arrest a reasonable chance of survival, CPR must
                be started immediately followed by defibrillation
                as quickly as possible. For both procedures, the
                sooner they happen, the better.
                You, the first trained person on the scene, are
                responsible for initiating the sequence. You must
                recognize the cardiovascular emergency, call for
                medical help, start CPR if needed, and apply a
                defibrillator if one is available. You are the crucial
                first three links in the Chain of Survival®.




                                                                         107
    Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR




    If nothing is wrong the ambulance crew can reassure the casualty.
    On the other hand, if there is a serious problem, you may have
    saved a life.

    Signs and symptoms of angina and a heart attack:
    A heart attack will produce shock and may display some or all of the
    following:
          •   Pale, ashen skin
          •   Sweating, cold and clammy to the touch
4         •   Shortness of breath
          •   Showing obvious pain or discomfort
    The pain or discomfort will be in the upper body, from the upper
    abdomen to the jaw and arms, and may feel like:
          •   Heaviness in chest
          •   Tightness or pressure in chest
          •   Squeezing or crushing chest
          •   Indigestion, nausea or vomiting
          •   Aching jaw
          •   Sore shoulder or arms




    108
                                        Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR




Some other signs and symptoms include:
   •    Fatigue
   •    Anxiety, which produces denial
   •    Central back pain
Denial is an important detail. If someone showing signs of shock,
having trouble breathing and experiencing pain insists there is
nothing wrong, then you should be very suspicious and take action.

First aid for angina/heart attack
   1.   Perform a scene survey, then do a primary survey. Ask the
                                                                             4
        casualty questions :
        •   “Can you show me where it hurts?”
        •   “Have you had this pain before?”
        •   “Do you have medication for this pain?”
   2.   Call for medical help and get a defibrillator.
   3.   Place the casualty at rest, the semi-sitting position is usually
        the best option, and reassure them.
   4.   Assist the conscious casualty to take their prescribed
        medication, usually nitroglycerin. If the casualty has no
        prescribed medication, or the first dose is ineffective, ask
        the casualty if they have any allergies to ASA, or if a doctor
        has ever told them not to take it. If the casualty believes
        they can take it, suggest they chew one regular ASA tablet
        (or two low-dose tablets). ASA can reduce the effects of a
        heart attack because of its anti-clotting properties.
   5.   If the casualty loses consciousness and stops breathing,
        start CPR.




                                                                      109
    Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR




    Helping with Nitroglycerin




4

    Nitroglycerin tablets or sprays are common medications for relief
    of chronic angina pain. A casualty in serious distress may need your
    help to take their medication.
    Ask the casualty if they have taken any other medications today.
    Drugs to treat erectile dysfunction such as Viagra® or CIALIS®
    may cause a significant decrease in the person’s blood pressure if
    nitroglycerin is taken as well.
    Have the casualty spray the medication under the tongue or place
    the tablets under the tongue—they aren’t to be swallowed.
    Nitroglycerin may be repeated, if needed, every 5-10 minutes to
    relieve pain, or until a maximum of three doses have been taken.
    Remember that if you have to assist someone to take their medica-
    tion, you must call for medical help!




    110
                                      Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR




Stroke and transient ischemic attack (TIA)
Stroke
A stroke happens when blood flow to a part of the brain is
interrupted either by a blocked artery or by a ruptured blood vessel
in the brain. A stroke may cause brain damage which impairs certain
body functions, depending on the part of the brain affected.

Transient ischemic attack (TIA)
A TIA is a temporary blockage of the blood flow to part of the brain.
                                                                           4
It’s typically of short duration and leaves no permanent damage but
looks exactly like a stroke.

Doctors now have therapies to restore blood flow to the heart
muscle and brain, but they work best if used right away. This is why
it’s important to realize there’s an emergency and call 9-1-1 to get
the casualty to the hospital right away—the longer medical help is
delayed, the more likely the heart or the brain will be damaged.




                                                                    111
    Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR




    Remember FAST as a way to check for the signs and symptoms of
    a stroke and to get immediate help.
          •    Facial droop. Ask them to smile. One side of the face may
               not move as well as the other side.
          •    Arm drift. Ask the casualty to hold both arms out with the
               palms up, and close their eyes. One arm may not move or
               drifts down compared to the other arm.
          •    Speech. Ask them to repeat a phrase you say. The casualty
               may slur words, use the incorrect words or is not able to
4              speak.
          •    Time. When was the onset of symptoms? Ask the casualty,
               or their family, friends, or bystanders when the symptoms
               were first noticed. Get immediate medical help; the earlier
               a stroke is treated the better the outcome.
    Other signs and symptoms of a stroke include
          •    Blurred vision
          •    Sudden confusion
          •    Dizziness
          •    Headache
          •    Loss of balance.
    It is important that first aid providers do not dismiss the signs and
    symptoms of a stroke as intoxication.

    First aid for stroke/TIA
          1.   Perform a scene survey, then do a primary survey; perform
               the FAST assessment.
          2.   Call for medical help.
          3.   Place the casualty at rest in the semi-sitting position.
          4.   Give nothing by mouth, especially ASA.
          5.   Give ongoing care.
    If the casualty becomes unconscious, place them in the recovery
    position. If there is paralysis, position the casualty with the
    paralyzed side up. This will reduce the chance of tissue or nerve
    damage to the affected side.

    112
                                       Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR




Cardiac arrest
Cardiac arrest means the heart stops beating properly. With no
blood flow going to the brain the casualty becomes unresponsive
and stops breathing. Cardiac arrest means the casualty is clinically
dead, but if CPR is started and a defibrillator is applied quickly
there is still an opportunity to restore a normal heartbeat.

Common causes of cardiac arrest include:
    •    Heart attack
    •    Severe injuries
                                                                            4
    •    Electrical shock
    •    Drug overdose
    •    Drowning
    •    Suffocation

Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR)
CPR is artificial respiration and artificial circulation. Artificial
respiration provides oxygen to the lungs. Artificial circulation causes
blood to flow through the body. The purpose of CPR is to circulate
enough oxygenated blood to the brain and other organs to delay
damage until either the heart starts beating again, or medical help
takes over from you. CPR is most effective when interruptions to
chest compressions are minimized.

CPR – Adult casualty
    1.   Perform a scene survey.
    2.   Assess responsiveness.
    3.   If there is no response, call for medical help on a mobile
         device, and place the phone on speaker-phone, and send
         someone for an AED. If no mobile phone is available, send
         or go for medical help and the AED, if available.




                                                                     113
    Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR




          4.   Perform a primary survey:
               •   Open the airway.
               •   Check for breathing for at least 5 and no more than 10
                   seconds.
          5.   If the casualty is not breathing, or not breathing effectively




4



               (agonal breaths) position your hands in the centre of the
               upper chest and your shoulders directly over your hands.
               Keep your elbows locked.




          6.   Give 30 compressions—Push hard—Push Fast!
               •   Press the heels of the hands straight down on the
                   breastbone. The depth of each compression should be
                   at 5-6 cm (2-2.4 inches).
               •   Release pressure and completely remove your weight
                   at the top of each compression to allow chest to return
                   to the resting position.
               •   Give compressions at a rate of 100 to 120 per minute.
                   Count compressions out loud to keep track of how
                   many you have given, and to help keep a steady
                   rhythm.

    114
                                       Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR




    7.   Open the airway by tilting the head and lifting the chin.
    8.   Position a barrier device and breathe into the casualty
         twice. For an adult casualty, each breath should take about
         for 1 second, with just enough air to make the chest rise.




                                                                            4

This is one cycle of 30:2 (30 compressions to 2 ventilations).
    9.   Continue CPR until either an AED is applied, the casualty
         begins to respond, another first aider or medical help takes
         over or you are too exhausted to continue. The AED should
         be applied as soon as it arrives at the scene.
Agonal breathing
Agonal breathing is an abnormal pattern of breathing driven by a
brain-stem reflex, characterized by irregular gasping respirations
at times accompanied by strange vocalizations. They can occur
with cardiac arrest and lead bystanders to believe the casualty is
breathing. A casualty with agonal breathing should be treated as
though they are not breathing.




                                                                     115
    Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR




    CPR – Child casualty
          1.   Perform a scene survey.
          2.   Assess responsiveness.
          3.   If there is no response, send or call for medical help and an
               AED if available.
    If you are alone with no phone perform 5 cycles of CPR (two
    minutes) then go for medical help. Carry the child with you if
    possible.
4         4.   Perform a primary survey:
               •   Open the airway.
               •   Check for breathing for at least 5 and no more than 10
                   seconds.




          5.   If the casualty is not breathing, or not breathing effectively
               (agonal breaths) position your hands in the centre of the
               upper chest and your shoulders directly over your hands.
               Keep your elbows locked. You may use one or two hands
               depending on the size of the child.




    116
                                      Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR




   6.   Give 30 compressions—Push hard—Push Fast!




                                                                           4




        •   Press the heels of the hands straight down on the
            breastbone. The depth of each compression should be
            1/3 of the chest depth, or 5 cm (2 inches).
        •   Release pressure and completely remove your weight
            at the top of each compression to allow chest to return
            to the resting position.
        •   Give compressions at a rate of 100 to 120 per minute.
            Count compressions out loud to keep track of how
            many you have given, and to help keep a steady
            rhythm.
   7.   Open the airway by tilting the head and lifting the chin.
   8.   Position a barrier device and breathe into the casualty
        twice, with just enough air to make the chest rise.
This is one cycle of 30:2 (30 compressions to 2 ventilations).
   9.   Continue CPR until either an AED is applied, the casualty
        begins to respond, another first aider or medical help takes
        over or you are too exhausted to continue. The AED should
        be applied as soon as it arrives to the scene.

                                                                    117
    Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR




    CPR – Infant casualty
          1.   Perform a scene survey.
          2.   Assess responsiveness. Gently tap the baby’s feet.
          3.   If there is no response, send or call for medical help and an
               AED if available.
    If you are alone with no phone perform 5 cycles of CPR (two
    minutes) then go for medical help. Carry the infant with you if
    possible.
4         4.   Perform a Primary Survey
               •   Open the airway.
               •   Check for breathing for at least 5 and no more 10
                   seconds.




          5.   If the baby is not breathing, or not breathing effectively
               (agonal breaths) begin CPR




          •    Place two fingers on the breastbone just below the nipple
               line. Push down on the breastbone 1/3 the depth of the
               chest or about 4 cm (1 1/2 inches).
    118
                                       Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR




    •    Release the pressure completely but keep your fingers
         in light contact with the chest. Repeat the pressure and
         release phases rhythmically so that each phase takes the
         same amount of time.
    •    Give compressions at a rate of 100 to 120 per minute.
         Count compressions out loud to keep track of how many
         you have given, and to help keep a steady rhythm.
    6.   Open the airway by tilting the head and lifting the chin.
    7.   Position a barrier device and breathe into the casualty
         twice, with just enough air to make the chest rise.                4
This is one cycle of 30:2 (30 compressions to 2 ventilations).
    8.   Continue CPR until either an AED is applied, the casualty
         begins to respond, another first aider or medical help takes
         over or you are too exhausted to continue. The AED should
         be applied as soon as it arrives to the scene.
The back of an infant’s head is quite large compared to the rest of
the body. This causes the baby’s head to come forward and close
off their airway.




An infant’s head flexes forward when they are lying on their back.
When giving CPR, it may be helpful to put a thin pad under the
shoulders to help keep the airway open—but don’t waste time
looking for a pad.




                                                                     119
    Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR




    Chest compression only CPR
    CPR guidelines stress early recognition of the emergency and stress
    the importance of calling 9-1-1 or the local emergency number if
    you find someone collapsed and unresponsive.
    If you have not been trained in CPR or are hesitant to perform
    ventilations, for any reason—don’t give up. Your actions can still
    save a life.
    Compression only CPR is CPR without mouth-to-mouth breaths.
4   Provide high quality chest compressions by pushing hard and fast
    on the centre of the chest, at a rate of 100 to 120 compressions per
    minute.
    Although this does not give the casualty any oxygen, this option
    can be used by people not trained in conventional CPR, or those
    who are unsure of their ability.




    Dispatcher-assisted CPR
    In many locales, the 9-1-1 dispatcher is trained to coach you
    through an emergency until medical help arrives. Put your phone
    on speaker and place it by the casualty’s head and talk to the
    dispatcher throughout the rescue.




    120
                                      Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR




How to take over CPR from another rescuer
  1.   Offer to help, tell the rescuer that you are trained in CPR.
       Ensure medical help has been called.




                                                                            4

  2.   Give 30 compressions followed by 2 breaths. Use your own
       barrier device if available




                                                                      121
    Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR




    Two-rescuer CPR
    If two trained rescuers are available, they can cooperate to perform
    CPR on a casualty. There are three advantages to two rescuers
    performing CPR as a team:
          •   CPR is a strenuous physical activity and as a first aider gets
              tired the quality of the chest compressions will deteriorate.
              By sharing the task of compressing the chest two
              rescuer CPR allows for a team to perform effective chest
              compressions for a longer period of time.
4         •   Two-rescuer CPR minimizes the time the compressions are
              interrupted for ventilations to be given.
          •   Two-rescuer CPR allows the rescuers to give feedback and
              support each other during a stressful event.
    To perform two-rescuer CPR the first aider who performs the
    primary survey stays at the casualty’s head, keeping the airway
    open and ventilating after 30 compressions. The second rescuer
    will compress the chest, but in order to maintain the most effective
    compressions, it is recommended that rescuers switch after every 5
    cycles of compressions and ventilations (approximately 2 minutes).

    Automated External Defibrillation—AED
    Automated external defibrillation, the application of an electric
    shock to a heart that has stopped pumping effectively, has been
    proven to be one of the most important tools in saving the lives of
    sudden cardiac arrest casualties. It is the third link in the Chain of
    Survival® and is the responsibility of the first aider.
    An automated external defibrillator (AED) is an electronic device
    that is programmed to recognize and shock two types of heart
    rhythms, Ventricular Fibrillation (VF) and pulseless Ventricular
    Tachycardia (VT). If the machine recognizes either VT or VF in a
    casualty, it will charge and will indicate that a shock is advised.
    The purpose of this shock is to correct the abnormal electrical
    disturbance and re-establish the heart rhythm.
    It is important to remember that AEDs will only shock when VT or VF
    is present. You cannot shock a heart that is in normal rhythm, nor will
    the machine shock when it is not appropriate, such as when the heart
    is stopping (asystole) or there is pulseless electrical activity (PEA)

    122
                                          Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR




Time is a critical factor in determining survival from cardiac arrest;
the heart will only stay in fibrillation a short time before all electrical
activity ceases. Defibrillation must be performed early to be most
effective. CPR can keep oxygenated blood flowing to the brain, and
helps extend the length of time that the heart will remain in VT or
VF, the only arrhythmias that AEDs will shock. CPR then can “buy
some time” for the casualty until the AED is attached and ready to
deliver a shock.
Using an AED (always follow the AED’s voice prompts)
    1.   Power on the AED.                                                     4
    2.   Follow the voice prompts. The
         audio instructions will direct
         you to:
         •   Bare the chest and attach
             electrode pads. The pads
             need to stick directly to the skin, so excessive sweat,
             water, and chest hair needs to be removed before
             application




         •   Stand back (or clear)
         •   Press the shock button and/or continue CPR as
             prompted by the machine
Continue with CPR and listen for the AED to give additional
instructions




                                                                        123
    Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR




    Defibrillation—Special Considerations and Special
    Circumstances
    Pregnant patients–AEDs can be used in all stages of pregnancy.

    Pacemakers or implanted defibrillators–Defibrillator pads
    should not be placed directly over a pacemaker site but should be
    approximately 2.5 cm (one inch) away. Look for scars or lumps on
    the chest as an indicator of implanted devices.

4 Children under 8 years of age–Automated external defibrillators
    (AEDs) may be used for children and infants. Special pads or a
    pediatric setting on the machine are used, but if not available adult
    pads can be used. Some adult pads show an alternate placement
    for children/infants.

    Patch medications–some casualties wear a patch that contains
    medication such as nitroglycerin for angina. If the patch is in the
    way of the pad placement, gently remove it with gloved hands from
    the chest and wipe the area clean.

    Wet environment–AEDs can be used in wet areas. Dry the chest
    to ensure good pad contact. Move the casualty to a dry area if
    possible. If you or the casualty is submersed in water, avoid using
    the AED.

    Metal surfaces–AEDs can be used safely with the casualty on a
    metal surface.

    Jewelry and piercings–Avoid placing pads over-top of piercings,
    jewelry, or anything that would cause a gap. AED pads should
    adhere flat to the skin.

    Environment–Ensure the environment you are using an AED in
    does not contain explosive gases.

    Post-resuscitation care and handover to EMS
    If defibrillation is successful, the casualty may start breathing on
    their own but remain unresponsive. In this case, place the casualty
    into the recovery position and monitor the ABCs. Leave the AED
    attached. The AED will continually monitor the heart rhythm or you
    may need to use the device again.
    124
                                       Cardiovascular emergencies and CPR




Certain information is important for emergency services personnel
such as the time of collapse, time when CPR was started, time when
first shock was delivered and number of shocks. Provide as much
detail as possible and follow the directions of medical personnel
once they arrive on the scene.
Regulations concerning the requirement of a workplace to have
an AED, and the necessary policies about AEDs, will be contained
within federal, provincial, or territorial legislation. Where not
specifically outlined by regulations, a workplace should have an
established AED policy which outlines:
    •   Certification and recertification requirements
                                                                            4
    •   Maintenance and inspection processes
    •   Post-use process (downloading information, resupplying
        pads and rescue pouch, etc.)
    •   Replacement of batteries and pads
    •   Replacement of unit at its end-of-life

Troubleshooting and maintenance
Sometimes the device will indicate “Check Electrodes”. If this
occurs, check the cable to pads connection, the cable to machine
connection and the adherence of the pads to the casualty’s chest.
Machines will also advise if motion is detected or if the battery
is low. AEDs are sold with an instruction manual that will outline
troubleshooting in detail.
Regular maintenance of AED units, including regular inspections,
are important to ensuring the AED is available when it is
needed. Most AEDs perform a daily system check and display
in some manner it is ready for use. A monthly check of the unit
is recommended to ensure the pads are still good (they have an
expiry date), the rescue pack is present and stocked, and the status
is green. Always follow manufacturer suggested guidelines and
checklists.




                                                                     125
Chapter 5
                                  Wounds and
                                  Bleeding




• Dressings, bandages
  and slings
• Wounds and bleeding
• Bleeding
• Recognizing internal bleeding
• Chest injuries
• Abdominal injuries
• Crush injuries
• Head and facial injuries
• Eye injuries
• Burns
• Bites and stings
    Wounds and bleeding




    Chapter 5 Wounds and bleeding
    Dressings, bandages, and slings
    Dressings
    A dressing is a protective covering put on a wound to help control
    bleeding, absorb blood from the wound, and prevent further
    contamination. A dressing should be:
          •   Sterile, or as clean as possible
          •   Large enough to cover the wound
          •   Highly absorbent
5         •   Compressible, thick and soft
          •   Non-stick and lint-free to reduce the possibility of sticking
              to the wound
    Dressings are available in a variety of sizes and designs. The
    dressings used most often in first aid are:
          •   Adhesive dressings – prepared sterile gauze dressings with
              their own adhesive strips




    128
                                                   Wounds and bleeding




    •   Wound closures – adhesive strips that bring the edges of
        the wound together to assist healing.




    •   Gauze dressings – packaged gauze available as sterile
        single packs or in bulk packaging
                                                                          5
    •   Pressure dressings – large sterile dressings of gauze and
        other absorbent material, usually with an attached roller
        bandage. They are used to apply pressure to a wound with
        severe bleeding
    •   Improvised dressings – prepared from lint-free sterile or
        clean absorbent material such as a sanitary pad
    •   Hemostatic dressings – pressure dressings impregnated
        with clot promoting agents used to stop serious bleeding.
        These dressings are not designed for all wound types.
        Check with your local protocols for more information.
Follow the guidelines below for putting on dressings:
    •   Prevent further contamination
    •   Extend the dressing beyond the edges of the wound
    •   If blood soaks through a dressing, leave it in place and
        cover with more dressings
    •   Secure a dressing with tape or bandages




                                                                    129
   Wounds and bleeding




   Bandages
   A bandage is any material that is used to hold a dressing in place,
   maintain pressure over a wound, support a limb or joint, immobilize
   parts of the body or secure a splint.
   When using bandages, remember to:
         •   Apply firmly to make sure bleeding is controlled or
             immobilization is achieved
         •   Check the circulation below the injury before and after
             applying a bandage, you may have applied it too tightly or
             swelling may have made it too tight.

5 The Triangular Bandage




   A triangular bandage may be used:
         •   As a whole cloth—opened to its fullest extent, as a sling or
             to hold a large dressing in place
         •   As a broad bandage—to hold splints in place or to apply
             pressure evenly over a large area
         •   As a narrow bandage—to secure dressings or splints or to
             immobilize ankles and feet in a figure-8




   130
                                                 Wounds and bleeding




Broad Bandage
To form a broad bandage, fold the point to the centre of the base
with the point slightly beyond the base
Fold in half again from the top to the base.




                                                                       5
Narrow Bandage




Fold a broad bandage in half again from the top to the base to
form a narrow bandage.




                                                                 131
    Wounds and bleeding




    Reef knot—the knot of choice
    The reef knot is the best knot for tying bandages and slings:
          •   It lies flat, making it more comfortable than other knots
          •   It does not slip
          •   It is easy to untie in order to adjust the bandage
    To tie a reef knot:
          •   Take one end of a bandage in each hand
          •   Lay the end from the right hand over the one from the left
              hand and pass it under to form a half-knot. This will transfer
              the ends from one hand to the other
5         •   The end now in the left hand should be laid over the one
              from the right and passed under to form another half-knot.
              The finished knot looks like two intertwined loops
          •   Tighten by pulling one loop against the other or by pulling
              only on the ends
    Place knots so they do not cause discomfort by pressing on skin or
    bone, particularly at the site of a fracture or at the neck, when tying
    a sling.




    If the knot is uncomfortable, place soft material underneath as
    padding.




    132
                                                   Wounds and bleeding




Figure-8
A figure-8 tie may be used to tie the ankles and feet, to secure a
splint to the ankles/feet, or to support an injured ankle.
To tie a figure-8:
    •    Position the centre of a narrow or broad triangular bandage
         under the ankle (or both ankles if tying the feet together).




                                                                           5


    •    Cross the ends over top the ankles, and bring the ends
         around the feet and tie off.




                                                                     133
    Wounds and bleeding




    Roller bandage
    Roller bandages, usually made of gauze-like elastic material, are
    used to hold dressings in place or to secure splints.
    Put on a roller bandage in a simple spiral. Starting at the narrow
    part of the limb, anchor the bandage with a few turns and continue
    wrapping the bandage, overlapping each turn by one quarter to
    one third of the bandage’s width. Make full-width overlaps with the
    final two or three turns and secure with a safety pin, adhesive tape
    or by cutting and tying the bandage as shown. Always check
    circulation below the wound before and after applying a bandage,
    you may have applied it too tightly or swelling may have made it
    too tight.
5




    Slings
    A sling can be easily improvised with a scarf, belt, necktie or other
    item that can go around the casualty’s neck. You can also support
    the arm by placing the hand inside a buttoned jacket or by pinning
    the sleeve of a shirt or jacket to the clothing in the proper position.
    Arm sling
    To put on an arm sling:
          1.   Support the forearm of the injured limb across
               the body. Place an open triangular bandage
               between the forearm and the chest so the
               point extends beyond the elbow and the base
               is straight up and down.




    134
                                                     Wounds and bleeding




    2.   Bring the upper end around the back of the neck to the
         front of the injured side. While still supporting the forearm,
         bring the lower end of the
         bandage over the hand and
         forearm and tie off on the
         injured side in the hollow of
         the collarbone. Place padding
         under the knot for comfort.
    3.   Twist the point into a “pigtail”
         at the elbow and tuck it inside
         the sling.
    4.   Adjust the sling so you can see
         the fingernails—this way you can watch them to check on           5
         circulation.
St. John tubular sling
This sling is used for injuries to the shoulder or collarbone. To put
on a St. John tubular sling:
    1.   Support the forearm of the injured side diagonally across
         the chest, the fingers pointing toward the opposite
         shoulder.
    2.   Place a triangular bandage over the forearm and hand with
         the point extending beyond the elbow and the upper end
         over the shoulder on the uninjured side. The base is placed
         vertically in line with the body on the uninjured side.




    3.   Ease the base of the bandage under the hand, forearm and
         elbow. Tuck the base of the bandage under the injured arm
         to make a pocket that runs the full length of the arm.


                                                                     135
    Wounds and bleeding




          4.   Gather the bandage at the elbow by twisting it and bring
               the lower end across the back and over the shoulder on the
               uninjured side. This closes the pocket at the elbow.
          5.   Gently adjust the height of the arm as you tie off the ends
               of the bandage so the knot rests in the natural hollow




5

               above the collarbone. Place padding under knot, if
               available. Tie the sling tightly enough to support the weight
               of the injured arm.




    136
                                                  Wounds and bleeding




Types of Wounds
A wound is any damage to the soft tissues of the body. It usually
results in the escape of blood from the blood vessels into
surrounding tissues, body cavities or out of the body.
A wound can be either open or closed:
    •   Open wound—a break in the outer layer of the skin
    •   Closed wound—no break in the outer layer of skin but
        there is internal bleeding
The aim in the care of wounds is to stop the bleeding and prevent
infection. Although some bleeding may help to wash contamination
from the wound, excessive blood flow must be stopped quickly to
minimize shock.                                                           5
Contusions or bruises




Contusions or bruises are closed wounds. The tissues under the
skin are damaged and bleed into surrounding tissues, causing
discolouration. A bruise may be a sign of a deeper, more serious
injury or illness.




                                                                    137
    Wounds and bleeding




    Abrasions or scrapes




    Abrasions or scrapes are open wounds where the outer protective
    layer of skin and the tiny underlying blood vessels are damaged.
5   The deeper layer of the skin is still intact.
    Incisions




    Incisions are clean cuts caused by something sharp such as a knife.
    Lacerations




    Lacerations are tears in the skin and underlying tissue with jagged
    and irregular edges.



    138
                                                     Wounds and bleeding




Puncture wounds




Puncture wounds are open wounds caused by blunt or pointed
instruments that may have a small opening, but often penetrate
deep into the tissue.                                                      5
Avulsions and Amputations




Avulsions are injuries that leave a piece of skin or other tissue either
partially or completely torn away from the body.
Amputations involve partial or complete loss of a body part.




                                                                     139
    Wounds and bleeding




    Bleeding
    Bleeding is the escape of blood from the blood vessels. In external
    bleeding, blood escapes the body through a surface wound. In
    internal bleeding, blood escapes from tissues inside the body.
    In arterial bleeding, the blood is bright red and spurts with each
    heartbeat.




5


    In venous bleeding, the blood is dark red and flows more steadily.




    Severe blood loss will result in the following signs and symptoms
    of shock:
          •   Pale, cold and clammy skin
          •   Rapid pulse, gradually becoming weaker
          •   Faintness, dizziness, thirst and nausea
          •   Restlessness and apprehension
          •   Shallow breathing, yawning, sighing and gasping for air



    140
                                                      Wounds and bleeding




First aid for severe external bleeding
    1.   Perform a scene survey, then do a primary survey.
    2.   To control severe bleeding, apply direct pressure to the
         wound.
    3.   Place the casualty at rest.
    4.   Once bleeding is under control, continue the primary
         survey, looking for other life-threatening injuries.




                                                                            5



    5.   Before bandaging the wound, check circulation below the
         injury. Bandage the dressing in place.
    6.   Check the circulation below the injury and compare it with
         the other side. If it is worse than it was before the injury was
         bandaged, loosen the bandage just enough to improve
         circulation if possible.
    7.   Give ongoing casualty care.
If the dressings become blood-soaked, don’t remove them—add
more dressings and continue pressure. Removing the blood-soaked
dressings may disturb blood clots and expose the wound to further
contamination.
Tourniquets and hemostatic dressings
For catastrophic wounds, where it will be difficult to control
bleeding, the use of a tourniquet, a constricting bandage, to stop
all blood flow to a limb, or hemostatic dressings to promote blood
clotting may be considered. First aid kits for use by the military, law
enforcement or wilderness first responders may contain specialized
dressings or purpose built tourniquets to control bleeding.


                                                                      141
    Wounds and bleeding




    Checking circulation below an injury




    Injuries and first aid procedures may reduce or cut off circulation to
    the tissue below the injury (called distal circulation):
5         •   Dislocations and fractures can impinge on an artery.
          •   Swelling or bandaging can compress an artery.
          •   Blood vessel damage may reduce blood flow through an
              artery.
    If oxygenated blood does not reach the tissues below the injury,
    after several hours there may be tissue damage that could lead to
    loss of the limb. Check circulation below an injury before tying any
    bandages, then once again after tying the bandages. You may have
    applied the bandages too tightly or swelling may have made them
    too tight.

    How to check circulation
    Check circulation below the injury by comparing the injured limb to
    the uninjured limb:
          •   Check skin colour—if the skin does not have same colour as
              the uninjured side, circulation may be impaired.
          •   Check skin temperature—if the skin temperature feels
              colder than the uninjured side, circulation may be impaired.
          •   Check for a pulse—at the wrist or ankle, and compare to
              the other limb.
          •   Check the nail beds—press on a fingernail or toenail until
              the nail bed turns white, and then release it. Note how long
              it takes for normal colour to return, and compare to the
              uninjured side.

    142
                                                     Wounds and bleeding




Improving impaired circulation
To improve impaired circulation:
    •    Loosen tight bandages.
    •    Reposition the limb to relieve any pressure on blood vessels
         in a fracture or dislocation. Only move the limb if there is no
         resistance or increased pain.
If circulation cannot be improved, get medical help immediately.

Internal bleeding
Suspect internal bleeding if:
    •    The casualty received a severe blow or a penetrating injury           5
         to the chest, neck, abdomen or groin
    •    There are major limb fractures such as a fractured upper leg
         or pelvis
Signs of internal bleeding:
    •    Bleeding from the ear canal or the nose
    •    Bloodshot or black eye (bleeding inside the head)
    •    Coughing up blood that looks bright red and frothy
         (bleeding into the lungs)
    •    Vomiting bright red blood, or brown blood that looks like
         coffee grounds
    •    Blood in the stool that looks either red or black and tarry
    •    Red or smoky brown-looking blood in the urine
    •    Signs of shock with no signs of external injury

First aid for internal bleeding
    1.   Perform a scene survey. Have the casualty lie flat on their
         back and do a primary survey.
    2.   Send or go for medical help.
    3.   Give ongoing casualty care, including laying the casualty in
         the supine position, and giving first aid for shock.
You can do very little to control internal bleeding. Give first aid to
minimize shock and get medical help as quickly as you can.

                                                                         143
    Wounds and bleeding




    Amputations
    An amputation is when a part of the body has been partly or
    completely cut off. You must control the bleeding from the wound,
    care for the amputated tissue and get medical help.

    First aid for amputations
          1.   Perform a scene survey, then do a primary survey.
          2.   Control bleeding—apply direct pressure to the wound.
               Reposition a partly amputated part to its normal position
               and bandage.


5




          3.   Send for medical help and continue ongoing casualty care
               to the casualty.
          4.   Care for the amputated part by wrapping it in a clean, moist
               dressing (if clean water is available).
          5.   Put the amputated part in a clean, watertight plastic bag
               and seal it. Put this bag in a second plastic bag or container
               partly filled with crushed ice. Attach a record of the date
               and time this was done and send this package with the
               casualty to medical help.




    144
                                                      Wounds and bleeding




    6.   If direct pressure fails to control life-threatening external
         limb bleeding, a tourniquet could be considered by a
         trained first aider (in special circumstances, such as mass
         casualty management, a disaster, remote locations).

Minor Wound Care
Preventing Contamination
All open wounds are contaminated to some degree. Tell the
casualty to seek medical help if signs of infection appear later.
    •    Wash your hands with soap and water and put on gloves if
         available.
    •    Do not cough or breathe directly over the wound.                      5
    •    Fully expose the wound but don’t touch it.
    •    Gently wash loose material from the surface of the wound.
         Wash and dry the surrounding skin with clean dressings,
         wiping away from the wound. An antibiotic cream can be
         used on superficial wounds and abrasions.
    •    Cover the wound with a sterile dressing.

Wound infection
The acronym SHARP identifies signs and symptoms of infection.
         S – Swollen
         H – Hot, feels warmer than the surrounding area
         A – Aches, a dull pain
         R – Red
         P – Pus may leak from the wound
Tetanus infection
Any wound may be contaminated by spores that cause tetanus, a
potentially fatal bacterial disease characterized by muscle spasms.
Tetanus is commonly referred to as “lockjaw.”
Deep wounds are at especially high risk of tetanus infection. Advise
a casualty with this type of wound to get medical help as soon as
they can. Symptoms may not arrive immediately.


                                                                         145
    Wounds and bleeding




    First aid for hand and foot injuries
    Hand and foot injuries are common. If the injury seems minor and
    the casualty chooses not to get medical help, instruct them to get
    medical help within 48 hours if there is still pain, loss of function, or
    an infection.

    First aid for bleeding from the palm of the hand
          1.   Start ESM. Perform a scene survey.
          2.   Perform a primary survey and expose the wound.



5




          3.   Control the bleeding with direct pressure with a bulky pad
               over sterile dressings. Check the circulation in the fingers
               and compare it with the other hand. Bend the fingers over
               the pad to make a fist and bandage the hand so the fist is
               held firmly closed:




    146
                                                Wounds and bleeding




•    Place the middle of a narrow triangular bandage on the
     inside of the wrist and bring the ends around the back of
     the hand, or start wrapping with a roller bandage at the
     wrist, and continue wrapping around the back of the hand.
•    Wrap the tightly bandage over the fingers and then down
     around the wrist.
•    Leave the thumb exposed, if possible, to check circulation.
     Tie the bandage off at the wrist and tuck in the ends.




                                                                      5



4.   Give ongoing casualty care, recheck the circulation below
     the injury, and get medical help. Use a sling to support the
     arm and hand if transporting.




                                                               147
    Wounds and bleeding




    First aid for pinched fingernail
    When a finger or toe nail has been pinched, sometimes called a nail
    bruise, the pressure from the blood under the nail can cause great
    pain. You can relieve this pain as follows:
          1.   Place the injured part under cool running water to reduce
               pain and swelling.
          2.   If the pain is severe, and you can see pooled blood under
               the nail, release the pressure under the nail as follows:
               •   Straighten a paper clip or blunt wire and heat one end
                   to red hot, using a stove element or the flame from
                   a lighter. Don’t use a needle, the hole it makes is too
5                  small to release the pooled blood effectively.
               •   Place the heated end of the paper clip on top of the
                   nail and let it melt a hole just deep enough to release
                   the pooled blood.
               •   Once the pressure has been released, wash the area
                   with water and put on an adhesive dressing.
          3.   Advise the casualty to seek medical help if signs and
               symptoms of an infection develop.

    First aid for slivers and splinters
    Slivers are small embedded objects - wood, thorns, glass or metal.
    This type of injury is common in the hands and feet. Although
    slivers may cause discomfort and pain, in most cases they can be
    removed easily without complications. In serious cases, slivers can
    be disabling and cause infection. Do not remove a sliver if it:
          •    Lies over a joint
          •    Is deeply embedded into the flesh
          •    Is in or close to the eye
          •    Has a barb (e.g. metal slivers and fishhooks)
          •    Cannot be removed easily
    In these cases, give first aid for an embedded object.




    148
                                                     Wounds and bleeding




Removing a sliver
   1.   Clean the area with water.
   2.   With sterile tweezers, grip the sliver as close to the skin as
        possible.
   3.   Pull the sliver in a straight line in the opposite direction to
        the angle of entry.
   4.   Get medical help if some of the sliver was not removed,
        there is more tissue damage than a simple, small puncture
        wound or if an infection develops.


                                                                            5




First aid for contusion (bruise)
With a contusion or bruise, blood escapes into the surrounding
tissue. Relieve the pain and reduce the swelling by using the
acronym RICE:
   R – Rest
   I – Immobilize
   C – Cold
   E – Elevate




                                                                      149
    Wounds and bleeding




    First aid for puncture wounds
    Puncture wounds are serious because of the possibility of serious
    internal damage and contamination carried deep inside the wound.
          1.   Perform a scene survey. The mechanism of injury is
               important. Then perform a primary survey. Expose
               the wound. Although there may not be much external
               bleeding, you should suspect internal bleeding, especially if
               the wound is in the chest or abdomen.
          2.   Control bleeding with direct pressure on the wound, and
               get medical help.
          3.   Give ongoing casualty care until handover.
5
    First aid for gunshot wound
    A gunshot wound is a serious type of puncture wound. The entry
    wound is often small, but the bullet may have travelled deep into
    or through the body and there may be an exit wound as well, which
    is often larger than the entry wound. The exit wound may not be
    directly across from the entry wound.
          1.   Perform a scene survey and ensure the area is safe for
               yourself and the casualty. Then perform a primary survey.
               Expose the wound and check carefully for an exit wound; it
               may not be where you expect it.
          2.   Control bleeding with direct pressure on the wound, and
               get medical help.
          3.   Place the casualty at rest and give first aid for shock.
          4.   Give ongoing casualty care.

    First aid for wounds with embedded objects
    Do not remove an object embedded in a wound if possible.
    Removing the object will probably result in heavier bleeding; the
    object can help stop bleeding. Removing it could cause further
    tissue damage too, for example a barb on a fish hook.




    150
                                               Wounds and bleeding




1.   Expose the injured area and assess the wound. Check the
     circulation below the injury.
2.   To stop the bleeding, put pressure around the embedded
     object. If the embedded object is short, “tent” a clean
     dressing loosely over the object to keep the wound clean,
     then place bulky dressings around the object to keep it
     from moving. This will apply pressure around the wound




                                                                     5




3.   Secure the bulky material (dressings) in place with a narrow
     bandage, taking care that pressure is not exerted on the
     embedded object.




4.   Check the circulation below the injury again.
5.   Give ongoing casualty care and get medical help.



                                                               151
   Wounds and bleeding




   Chest injuries
   Wounds to the chest can cause breathing problems and require
   immediate medical help.

   Pneumothorax
   A pneumothorax is caused by air in the chest between the lung
   and the chest wall. Air can enter from the outside, an open
   pneumothorax, or penetrating chest wound. Air can also enter from
   the lung, a closed (or spontaneous) pneumothorax. Breathing with
   a pneumothorax becomes impaired as the lungs begin to collapse.
   Medical help is required immediately.

5 First aid for a penetrating chest wound
         1.   Perform a scene survey and primary survey.
         2.   If the open chest wound has significant bleeding, cover it
              by pressing the casualty’s hand, a bystander’s hand or your
              own hand over the wound (preferably a gloved hand). If
              there is no significant bleeding, the first aider may leave
              the wound exposed, or use a non-occlusive dressing. If the
              dressing becomes saturated, it must be changed.
         3.   Place the casualty in the position that makes breathing
              easiest—this is usually semi-sitting, leaning slightly towards
              the injured side. This position keeps the uninjured side
              of the chest upward so it can be used most effectively for
              breathing.
         4.   Do not seal the wound with an airtight dressing, but cover
              the wound to prevent further contamination. If the dressing
              becomes wet, replace it with a dry dressing.
         5.   Give ongoing casualty care, monitoring breathing often.
   There is not always an open wound with a pneumothorax. A
   pneumothorax always has the potential to be a life-threatening
   breathing emergency and medical help is needed as quickly as
   possible.




   152
                                                      Wounds and bleeding




First aid for a blast injury that affects breathing
For Canadians working in the mining and construction industries,
explosives are a workplace hazard. There are three mechanisms of
injury from an explosion:
    •    Injuries from being struck by material thrown by the blast
    •    Injuries from being thrown by the blast
    •    Injuries to hollow organs, including the lungs, caused by the
         shock wave from the blast
The casualty may complain of chest pain and cough up frothy
blood.
    1.   Perform a scene survey. If the casualty was thrown by the
         blast, suspect a head or spinal injury and prevent any
                                                                              5
         unnecessary movement. Perform a primary survey.
    2.   Place the casualty in a semi sitting position if there is no
         suspected head or spinal injury. Send for medical help.
    3.   Monitor breathing closely.
    4.   Give ongoing casualty care.

Abdominal injuries
Abdominal wounds may be closed or open. Closed wounds occur
when internal abdominal tissues are damaged but the skin is intact.
An open abdominal wound has a break in the skin where internal
organs may protrude. Complications from abdominal wounds
may include severe bleeding (either internal or external) and
contamination from the contents of ruptured abdominal organs.
To assess an abdominal injury expose the injured area and look
for open wounds. Consider the history of the incident, especially
the mechanism of injury. Observe the casualty’s position; are they
‘guarding’ their abdomen? Gently feel for swelling, rigidity, and
pain.
If you suspect an abdominal injury, you should also suspect internal
bleeding that may be severe. Give first aid for severe internal
bleeding.




                                                                        153
    Wounds and bleeding




    First aid for open abdominal wounds
          1.   Perform a scene survey and a primary survey.
          2.   If you find an open abdominal wound you must be prevent
               it from opening wider. The internal organs may be
               displaced. Position the casualty in the semi-sitting position
               with the knees raised and supported.




5


          3.   Dress the wound. The method of dressing a wound of the
               abdominal wall depends on whether or not internal organs
               are protruding:
               •   If the organs are not protruding, apply a dry dressing to
                   the wound and bandage firmly.
               •   If the organs are protruding, do not try to put them
                   back into the abdomen. Put on a moist dressing to stop
                   the organs from drying out and bandage loosely with
                   two broad bandages.
          4.   Give ongoing casualty care.




    154
                                                       Wounds and bleeding




Crush injuries
A crushing force can cause extensive bruising of the area, and
there may be complications including fractures or ruptured organs.
When the crushed area is limited, such as a hand or foot, the injury
is considered serious, but is not usually life-threatening. However, a
major crush injury may cause compartment syndrome, and needs
medical help immediately. This occurs when excessive pressure
builds up inside the body, usually from bleeding or swelling after
an injury. The dangerously high pressure in compartment syndrome
can cut off the flow of blood through the affected area.
Severe shock can develop after a casualty is released from the
weight that caused the crush injury. When the crushing force is
removed, fluids from the crushed tissues leak into surrounding               5
tissues—this causes shock.
When muscle is crushed, it releases the contents of muscle cells
into the blood. If the injury is large, it can cause kidney failure. This
is crush syndrome, also called post-traumatic acute renal (kidney)
failure.

First aid for crush injuries
    1.   Perform a scene survey and a primary survey.
    2.   Give first aid for shock right away—even if there are no
         signs, shock will probably develop.
    3.   Call for medical help and give ongoing casualty care




                                                                       155
    Wounds and bleeding




    Scalp and facial injuries
    First aid for bleeding from the scalp
    Bleeding from the scalp is often severe and may be complicated by
    a fracture of the skull or an embedded object. Avoid direct
    pressure, probing and contaminating the wound.
          1.   Perform a scene survey and a
               primary survey.
          2.   Apply a thick, sterile dressing
               and bandage it firmly in place
               with a head bandage.
5         3.   If there is suspected underlying
               skull fracture, give first aid for a
               fracture of the skull.
          4.   If there is an embedded object,
               apply dressings around the
               object to maintain pressure
               around but away from the
               wound.
          5.   Give ongoing casualty care.




    156
                                                       Wounds and bleeding




First aid for bleeding from inside the ear
Don’t try to stop the bleeding from the ear canal by putting
pressure on the ear or by packing it with dressings. To reduce the
risk of infection inside the ear, it is best to let the blood drain away.
    1.   Perform a scene survey and assess the mechanism of injury.
         If you suspect a head or spinal injury, tell the casualty not to
         move. Do a primary survey.




                                                                             5



    2.   Assess the bleeding from the ear. If the blood from the ear
         is mixed with straw-coloured fluid, suspect a skull fracture—
         steady and support the head and neck. Place a dressing
         lightly over the ear and give first aid for a skull fracture. The
         dressing will absorb the blood and protect the wound.
    3.   If a head or spinal injury is not suspected, lightly tape a
         dressing over the ear. Position the casualty to allow the
         blood to drain from the ear if injuries permit. If the casualty
         is unconscious and injuries permit, put dressings over the
         ear and place them in the recovery position with the injured
         side down.
    4.   Give ongoing casualty care.




                                                                       157
    Wounds and bleeding




    First aid for a nosebleed
    A nosebleed may start for no obvious reason, or may be caused by
    blowing the nose, an injury to the nose, or by an indirect injury, such
    as a fractured skull.
          1.   Perform a scene survey and assess the mechanism of injury.
               If you suspect a head or spinal injury, tell the casualty not to
               move. Do a primary survey.
          2.   Assess the bleeding from the nose. If the blood from the
               nose is mixed with straw-coloured fluid, suspect a skull
               fracture. Allow the nose to bleed and give first aid for a
               skull fracture.
5         3.   If a head or spinal injury is not suspected, place the casualty
               in a sitting position with the head slightly forward. Leaning
               forward allows blood to drain from the nose and mouth
               instead of back into the throat and stomach where it will
               cause vomiting.
          4.   Tell the casualty to compress the entire fleshy part below
               the bridge of the nose firmly with the thumb and index
               finger for about 10 minutes or until bleeding stops.




          5.   Tell the casualty to breathe through the mouth and not
               blow their nose for a few hours, so that blood clots will not
               be disturbed. If bleeding does not stop with this first aid, or
               if it starts again, get medical help.




    158
                                                      Wounds and bleeding




First aid for a knocked-out tooth
A knocked-out tooth can be re-implanted if the casualty receives
medical/dental help quickly.




    1.   Perform a scene survey and assess the mechanism of injury.
         If you suspect a head or spinal injury, tell the casualty not to   5
         move. Do a primary survey.
    2.   Apply direct pressure to stop the bleeding from the socket
         of the tooth. Seat the casualty with the head forward so
         blood can drain out of the mouth.
    3.   Place the knocked-out tooth in a balanced salt solution, or
         coconut milk. If none of these are available, the casualties
         own saliva will do. Handle the tooth by the top—don’t
         touch the root.
    4.   Give ongoing casualty care.

Bleeding from the cheek, gums or tongue
When there is bleeding from the gums or mouth, first assess the
mechanism of injury to determine if there is a chance of a serious
head and/or spinal injury. Make sure the bleeding in the mouth
doesn’t block the airway.
Control the bleeding in the mouth using
direct pressure over a clean, preferably sterile,
dressing. Do not wash out the mouth after
bleeding has stopped, this may dislodge clots
and cause bleeding to start again.




                                                                      159
    Wounds and bleeding




    Eye injuries
    The eye can be injured very easily; proper first aid given right away
    may prevent partial or complete loss of eyesight. Tears may not be
    enough to loosen and wash away irritating particles on the eye.

    Signs and Symptoms of an Eye Injury
    Some signs and symptoms that will indicate an injury to the eye
    include:
          •    Pain
          •    Blurred or double vision
          •    Excessive tearing
5         •    Feelings of grit or a particle under the lid
          •    Broken blood vessels or red spots
          •    Bleeding or other fluids from the eye
          •    Deformity
          •    Loss of vision

    First aid for a loose foreign particle in the eye
          1.   Begin by asking the casualty where they feel the particle is
               located.
          2.   If it feels like the particle is under the upper lid, instruct
               the casualty to grasp the upper eyelashes and pull the lid
               straight out and then down over the lower eyelashes to try
               to sweep the particle away.
    Try this several times. Remember to remove excess eye make-up
    before attempting this procedure.
    If the particle is still in the eye, try flushing it out using clean running
    water from a tap, an eye cup or eye wash bottle.
    If the above methods have not been successful, you will need to
    examine the surface of the eye and under the lids.




    160
                                                       Wounds and bleeding




Examining the eye
   1.   Seat the casualty facing a good light and
        steady the head.
   2.   Instruct the casualty to look to the left,
        right, up and down. A penlight directed
                                                              Do not
        across the eye will cause a shadow to
                                                            attempt to
        appear if the particle is in the path of the       examine the
        light, making it easier to see.                     eye if there
   3.   To examine under the upper and lower               are burns or
        lids, gently pull down on the lower lid and       injuries to the
                                                              eyelid.
        ask the casualty to look up. To examine
        under the upper lid, gently pull
        up on the lashes and ask the
                                                                             5
        casualty to look down. Use your
        penlight to check under the
        lids.
   4.   If you locate the particle,
        remove it gently using the
        moist corner of a facial tissue,
        clean cloth or cotton-tipped
        applicator. Do not try to
        remove a particle that is stuck
        to the eye, or is located on the coloured part of the eye. If
        the casualty is wearing contact lenses, have them remove
        the lens before trying to remove a particle from the eye.

First aid when you cannot safely remove a particle
from the eye
   1.   If removing the particle is unsuccessful, warn the casualty
        not to rub the eye because this may cause pain and tissue
        damage.
   2.   Close the casualty’s eye and cover the affected eye with an
        eye or gauze pad. Extend the covering to the forehead and
        cheek to avoid pressure on the eye.
   3.   Secure lightly in position with a bandage or adhesive strips.
        Make sure there is no pressure on the eyeball.
   4.   Give ongoing casualty care and get medical help.

                                                                       161
   Wounds and bleeding




   Wounds in the soft tissue around the eye
   Wounds to the eyelid and soft tissue around the eye are serious
   because there may be injury to the eyeball. Blows from blunt
   objects may cause bruises and damage the bones that surround
   and protect the eyes.
   Cover only the most seriously injured eye to avoid the psychological
   stress that the casualty may suffer when both eyes are covered.
   This leaves the casualty able to walk on their own. If both eyes must
   be covered due to serious injury, (e.g. intense light burn from arc
   welding), reassure the casualty often by explaining what is being
   done and why. This casualty must be carried.

5 First aid for lacerations and bruises around the eye
   Lacerated eyelids usually bleed profusely because of their rich
   blood supply. A dressing on the area will usually control bleeding.
   Never apply pressure to the eyeball—this may force fluid out of the
   eyeball and cause permanent damage to the eye.




   First aid for an embedded object in or near the
   eyeball
   Give first aid for an embedded object in or near the eyeball. As for
   any embedded object, prevent the embedded object from moving
   since movement could cause further damage to the eyeball.
         1.   Perform a scene survey and primary survey. Have a
              bystander support the head.
         2.   Place dressings, preferably sterile, around the embedded
              object. Place padding or dressings around the object in a

   162
                                                       Wounds and bleeding




         “log cabin” fashion, to stabilize the object. Make sure there
         is no pressure on the eyeball.
    3.   Arrange transportation of the casualty on a stretcher to
         medical help as soon as possible.




                                                                             5
First aid for an extruded eyeball
“Extruded” means the eyeball has been
thrust out of its socket. Do not try to put the
eye back into position.
    1.   Perform a scene survey and primary
         survey. Have a bystander support the
         head.
    1.   Gently cover the eyeball and
         socket with a moist dressing. Hold
         this in place with tape and more
         dressings.
    1.   Give ongoing casualty care until handover.

First aid for chemical burns to the eye
The eyes can be permanently injured by corrosive
chemicals in either solid or liquid form. Casualties
                                                          When working
normally suffer intense pain and are very sensitive
                                                          with Chemicals,
to light. Give first aid as follows:
                                                            know where
    1.   Perform a scene survey and primary survey.        to find Safety
         Have a bystander support the head.                 Data Sheets
                                                          (SDS) and refer
    2.   Sit or lay the casualty down. If only one eye      to them for
         is injured, protect the uninjured eye.            guidance with
                                                              first aid.

                                                                      163
    Wounds and bleeding




          3.   If the chemical is a dry powder, brush away whatever is on
               the skin. Do not use your bare hands.




5         4.   Flush the injured eye with cool water. Since pain may
               make it hard for the casualty to keep the eye open, gently
               open the eye with your fingers. Flush the eye for at least
               15 minutes.
          5.   Cover the injured eye with dressings. If both eyes are
               injured, cover the more seriously injured eye. Only cover
               both eyes if the casualty is more comfortable that way.
               Covering both eyes blinds the casualty and adds to the
               stress of the scene. If you do cover both eyes, keep the
               casualty lying down.
          6.   Give ongoing casualty care.
    If the casualty is wearing contact lenses
    Don’t waste time trying to remove contact lenses. Flush the eyes for
    15 minutes—this may wash the lenses out. If not, have the casualty
    remove them. Lenses exposed to chemicals should be thrown away
    (so it doesn’t matter if they are washed away during flushing).
    When there is a risk of eye injury from chemicals, proper eye-wash
    equipment should be kept nearby.




    164
                                                   Wounds and bleeding




First aid for intense light burns to the eye
Burns to the eyes may be caused by prolonged exposure to intense
light such as direct or reflected sunlight or a short duration event
like the flash from an arc welder. Snow blindness is a common injury
of this kind. As with a sunburn, the casualty may not feel the tissue
damage happening but will develop symptoms several hours after
exposure. Signs and symptoms include:
    •    Sensitivity to light
    •    Pain
    •    A gritty feeling in the eyes
Give first aid as follows:
    1.   Perform a scene survey and primary survey.
                                                                          5
    2.   Cover the eyes to cool them and keep the light out. The
         casualty will be temporarily blinded, so reassure them
         often.
    3.   Give ongoing casualty care.

Burns
Burns are injuries to the skin and other tissues caused by heat,
radiation or chemicals. They are a leading cause of injury in the
home. Young children and elderly people are especially at risk of
being burned, and at these ages, burn injuries can be serious.

Types of burns
Heat burns (also called “thermal” burns)
Burns from heat applied to the body are the most common of
burns. A scald is a heat burn caused by hot liquid or steam. Heat
burns can also be caused by friction.




                                                                    165
   Wounds and bleeding




   Chemical burns
   Chemical burns are often serious because the chemicals continue
   to burn as long as they remain on the skin. Examples of chemicals
   that can burn include acids or alkali metals.




5 Electrical burns
   Electrical burns result from contact with an electric current.
   Although it is heat that causes these burns, electrical burns are
   considered separately because of the complications caused by the
   electricity.




   Radiation burns
   Most people have experienced a radiation burn in the form of
   sunburn, where the sun is the source of radiant energy.
   Other types of radiant energy that can cause burns include X-rays,
   arc welder’s flash and radiation from radioactive material.




   166
                                                    Wounds and bleeding




Severity of a burn
Burns are classified as critical, moderate or mild depending on:
    •   The depth of the burn
    •   The amount of body surface that is burned
    •   The part(s) of the body that is burned
    •   The age and physical condition of the casualty

Burn depth
The skin protects the body from bacteria, helps control body
temperature and keeps body fluid in the body. When the skin is
damaged by a burn, it cannot do these functions properly, or at all.      5
The severity of a burn depends on the depth of the tissue damage.




The deeper the burn, the more serious it is. In first aid, burns are
described as superficial, partial thickness or full thickness burns
depending on how deep into the skin they extend.




                                                                   167
   Wounds and bleeding




   Estimating the burned area—the rule of nines
   A first aider can quickly estimate how much body surface area has
   been burned using the rule of nines. The body is divided up into
   areas of either nine or eighteen per cent of total body area. Add
   these areas to quickly calculate the percentage of the body that is
   affected. The percentages change slightly for a child’s body.
   Rule of nines for an adult
   9%—head and neck together
   9%—each arm
   18%—front surfaces of the trunk
5 18%—rear surfaces of the trunk
   1%—genitalia
   18%—each leg
   Rule of nines for a child
               18%—head and neck together
               9%—each arm
               18%—front surfaces of the trunk
               18%—rear surfaces of the trunk
               14%—each leg




   Another way to estimate burned area
   The area of the casualty’s palm equals one per cent of the casualty’s
   body surface area. With this information, you can estimate the
   percentage of the body that is burned.




   168
                                                     Wounds and bleeding




Critical burns
The burns that are critical, that may be life-threatening or can cause
life-long disability or disfigurement include:
    •   Any burn that interferes with breathing, inhalation injuries
    •   Any burn where there is also a serious soft tissue injury or
        fracture
    •   Any burn where the skin bends, including the hands,
        elbows, knees, etc.
    •   All electrical burns, because of internal injuries or cardiac
        compromise
    •   Most chemical burns                                                   5
    •   Burns to casualties under two or over fifty years old—they
        do not tolerate burns well
    •   Burns to casualties who have serious underlying medical
        conditions including diabetes, seizure disorders,
        hypertension, respiratory difficulties, or mental illness

Complications of burns
Common complications of burns include:
    •   Shock caused by the loss of blood or blood plasma to the
        surrounding tissues is the immediate danger
    •   Infection, because burned skin isn’t a good barrier to
        bacteria
    •   Breathing problems if the face or throat is burned, or the
        casualty has inhaled smoke, fumes or steam
    •   Swelling, as clothing and jewellery will cut off circulation
        when the area swells




                                                                        169
    Wounds and bleeding




    Inhalation injuries
    Inhalation injuries occur when the casualty inhales hot steam or hot
    (superheated) air, smoke or poisonous chemicals.
    Signs and symptoms of inhalation injuries include signs of shock:
          •   Dizziness, restlessness, confusion,
          •   Pallor or cyanosis
          •   Abnormal breathing rate or depth
    Along with a history of exposure to heat and:
          •   Noisy breathing

5         •   Pain during breathing
          •   Burns on the face, especially the mouth and nose
          •   Singed hair on the face or head
          •   Sooty or smoky smell on breath
          •   Sore throat, hoarseness, barking cough, difficulty
              swallowing
    The only first aid for someone with suspected inhalation injuries is
    to get to medical aid quickly. Place a conscious casualty in the semi-
    sitting position if possible and combat shock.

    Recognizing burns
    Superficial burn–only the top layer of the skin is damaged
          •   Skin colour is pink to red
          •   Slight swelling
          •   Skin is dry
          •   Tenderness to severe pain in the
              injured area




    170
                                                     Wounds and bleeding




Partial Thickness burn–the top two layers of the skin are damaged
    •    Skin looks raw and is mottled red in
         colour
    •    Skin is moist and ranges in colour from
         white to cherry red
    •    Blisters that contain clear fluid
    •    Extreme pain
Full Thickness burn–the full thickness of the
skin, including tissues under the skin are
damaged
    •    Skin is pearly-white, tan-coloured or
         charred black                                                     5
    •    Skin is dry and leathery
    •    You may see blood vessels and bones
         under the skin
    •    Little or no pain (nerves are destroyed)

First aid for heat burns
    1.   Do a scene survey and a primary survey.
    2.   Cool the burn right away:
         •   Immerse it in cool water if possible.
         •   If you can’t do this, pour cool water on the area or
             cover it with a clean, wet cloth.
         •   Cool the burn until the pain has lessened. This will
             reduce the temperature of the burned area, and reduce
             tissue damage, swelling, blistering and relieve the pain.




                                                                    171
    Wounds and bleeding




          3.   Remove jewellery and tight clothing before the injury
               swells. Don’t remove anything that is stuck.
          4.   When the pain has lessened, loosely cover the burn with a
               clean, lint-free dressing. If the area is large, use a sheet.
          5.   Give ongoing casualty care.
    Precautions for first aid for burns
          •    Do not breathe on, cough over or touch the burned area.
          •    Do not break blisters.
          •    Do not remove clothing that is stuck to the burned area.
          •    Do not use butter, lotions*, ointments* or oily dressings on
5              a burn.
          •    Do not cover a burn with cotton wool or other fluffy
               material.
          •    Do not use adhesive dressings.
          •    Do not cool the casualty too much. Once the area is
               cooled, take action to keep the casualty warm.
    *Sunburn lotions and ointments can be used on minor sunburn.
    Burn dressings
    A good burn dressing is sterile, lint-free and won’t stick to the
    injury when it is removed. If you don’t have something like this, use
    something clean and lint-free, like a linen sheet. Another type of
    burn dressing is the “gelled water” burn dressing, e.g. Water-Jel®.
    These sterile dressings are coated with a jelly-like substance that
    is mostly water. As such, the dressings are effective in cooling the
    burn, keeping it clean and providing pain relief. Use these dressings
    according to the instructions on the package.

    First aid for chemical burns
    A corrosive chemical will keep burning as long as it is on the skin.
    The faster you get the chemical off the skin, the less tissue damage
    there will be.
          1.   Do a scene survey and a primary survey.
          2.   Flush the area with large amounts of cool water. Remove
               contaminated clothing while flushing. If the chemical is a

    172
                                                    Wounds and bleeding




         dry powder, quickly brush off any loose chemical with a
         cloth before flushing.
    3.   Continue flushing the area with water for 15 to 20 minutes.
    4.   When the pain has lessened, loosely cover the burn with a
         clean, lint-free dressing.
    5.   Give ongoing casualty care.




                                                                          5


If you work with chemicals, make sure you know the specific first
aid for the chemicals in your workplace. The safety data sheet
(SDS), for each chemical contains this information. Send the SDS
to the hospital with the injured worker if possible. If you work with
chemicals at your place of employment, you are required to be
certified in WHMIS/GHS.

First aid for electrical burns
Electrical burns can be either flash burns or contact burns.
A flash burn results when high voltage electricity arcs (jumps)
from the electric source to the casualty. When the electricity arcs,
it produces intense heat for a very short time and this heat causes
burns, which can be a very deep. The force can throw the casualty
as well. Head/spinal injuries, fractures or dislocations may be
present.
In a contact burn, electricity travels through the body. The body
may be burned at both the point where the electricity entered the
body and where it exited. There may also be severe tissue damage
inside the body, along the path the electricity followed.




                                                                    173
    Wounds and bleeding




    An electrical current going through the body can cause breathing to
    stop and/or the heart to stop. There is also the danger of electrical
    injury to the first aider.
          1.   Do a scene survey, then a primary survey. Make sure there is
               no further danger from electricity; call the power company
               or other officials to make the scene safe. If high voltages
               are involved, all you can do is keep others out of the area
               until the power is shut off.




5


          2.   Does it look like the casualty was thrown? If so, suspect a
               head or spinal injury.
          3.   Do a secondary survey to locate burns and any fractures,
               dislocations, etc. Look for both entry and exit burns.
          4.   Give first aid for the burns by covering them with clean, dry
               dressings.
          5.   Give first aid for any fractures or dislocations.
          6.   Give ongoing casualty care.
    When power lines are down
          •    If there is a possibility of a downed power line or a
               weakened pole, do not leave your vehicle until you have
               inspected the surrounding area, looking for downed power
               lines.
          •    Stay inside your vehicle if it is touching power lines. Wait for
               authorities to arrive, then follow their instructions.
          •    If you suspect or see any downed power lines, don’t let
               anyone enter the area. When you are sure no one will enter
               the area, notify the power company.


    174
                                                      Wounds and bleeding




    •    With high voltages, electricity can travel through the
         ground, energizing the area around the power lines. If the
         soles of your feet tingle as you enter an area, you’ve gone
         too far—get back.
    •    Assume all downed power lines are live. A high voltage
         wire may be unpredictable—it may jump to an object for a
         better ground. Stay well away from any wires.
    •    Remember that vehicles, guardrails, metal fences, etc.,
         conduct electricity.

First aid for sunburn
Sunburns can range in severity from those that are mildly
uncomfortable to those that are serious because they cover a large          5
area of the body, and can be complicated by heatstroke.
For minor sunburn, give first aid as follows:
    1.   Get out of the sun, and do a scene survey and primary
         survey.
    2.   Gently sponge the area with cool water or cover with a wet
         towel, to relieve the pain. Repeat this step as needed to
         relieve pain.
    3.   Pat the skin dry and put on a medicated sunburn ointment
         if available. Apply the lotion according to directions on the
         package.
    4.   Protect burned areas from further exposure to the sun.
    5.   Don’t break any blisters—doing so may promote infection.
         If large areas of the skin begin to blister, get medical help.
    6.   If the casualty begins to vomit, or develops a fever, give first
         aid for heat injuries and get medical help.

First aid for burns from X-rays and nuclear radiation
There is no specific first aid for radiation burns from X-rays or
radioactive material. Give first aid following the guidelines for first
aid for heat burns. In an environment where there is radioactive
material, protect yourself accordingly.




                                                                      175
    Wounds and bleeding




    How to put out a fire on your clothes
    If your clothing catches fire:
    Stop – moving




5
    Drop – to the ground




    Roll – several times to put flames out




    Don’t run – this only fans the flames.

    176
                                                 Wounds and bleeding




How to exit a smoke-filled room
If you can, cover your mouth and nose with a wet cloth




                                                                       5
Hot smoke rises—keep your head low as you crawl under the
smoke




                                                                177
    Wounds and bleeding




    Bites and stings
    Animal and human bites
    Animal and human bites that cause puncture wounds or lacerations
    may carry contaminated saliva into the body and are dangerous
    because of the risk of infection. The most common human bites in
    adults are to the hand. All animal and human bites that break the
    skin should be seen by a doctor.
    Rabies is an acute viral disease of the nervous system that is always
    fatal if not treated. Rabies should be suspected in domestic animals
    if they behave in an unusual way, and in all attacks by wild animals
    (bats, foxes, skunks, raccoons, and more). The rabies virus can
5   be transmitted to anyone who handles a diseased animal or who
    touches the area of the wound that carries the virus. To be safe,
    always give first aid for an animal bite as if the animal had rabies,
    until it is proved otherwise.
    Be especially careful when giving first aid to anyone you suspect
    may have been exposed to rabies and in handling the live or dead
    animal involved. Wear gloves and/or scrub your hands thoroughly
    after contact to reduce the risk of infection.
    Even if a person has been exposed to a rabid animal, full-blown
    rabies can be prevented if immunization against the disease is
    given quickly.

    First aid for animal/human bites
          1.   Perform a scene survey and a primary survey.
          2.   Examine the wound to see if the skin was broken.
          3.   If there is bleeding, allow moderate bleeding of the
               wound—this helps to cleanse the wound.
          4.   Wash the wound then apply a dressing and bandage.
          5.   Get medical help.

    Snakebite
    Rattlesnakes are the only poisonous snakes found in the wild in
    Canada. Varieties of this snake can be found in parts of British
    Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan and Ontario.


    178
                                                     Wounds and bleeding




If you are travelling to areas where there are other poisonous
snakes, learn the first aid for snakebites in that area.
A rattlesnake’s bite leaves one or two puncture holes in the skin.
Venom may be injected into the casualty. If it is, the casualty will feel
a burning sensation. This is followed by swelling and discolouration,
severe pain, weakness, sweating, nausea, vomiting and chills.
Breathing may be affected.

First aid for snakebite
    1.   Do a scene survey and primary survey.
    2.   Place the casualty at rest in a semi-sitting position and keep
         the affected limb below heart level. By placing the casualty
         at rest, the venom won’t spread as quickly.                        5
    3.   Flush the bite if possible. Wrap a large roller bandage
         around the entire length of the bitten extremity, just tight
         enough that you can get your fingers under the bandage.
         This is an effective and safe way to slow circulation of the
         venom.
    4.   Immobilize the limb.
    5.   Give ongoing casualty care.

Precautions when dealing with snakes and snakebite
    •    Most snakes will be within 10 metres of the place where the
         bite took place–be careful
    •    Do not let a snakebite casualty walk if there is any other
         method of transportation to medical help
    •    Do not give the casualty alcoholic beverages
    •    Do not cut the puncture marks or try to suck poison out
         with your mouth
    •    Do not apply ice–this could cause more damage
    •    If the snake is killed, bring it to medical help for
         identification, but do not touch the snake directly. Avoid the
         snake’s head—a dead snake still may have a bite reflex




                                                                      179
    Wounds and bleeding




    Insect bites and stings
    An insect bite or sting causes only a painful swelling with redness
    and itching at the site for most people. But some people are
    severely allergic to these stings and being stung may cause a life-
    threatening allergic reaction.

    Signs and symptoms of a localized reaction at the site of a bite or
    sting:
          •   Sudden pain
          •   Swelling
          •   Heat
5         •   Redness
          •   Itching

    Signs and symptoms of an anaphylactic reaction to a bite or sting:
          •   General itching, rash
          •   A bump on the skin that may be white, pink, reddish or
              blotchy
          •   Generalized swelling—especially of the airway
          •   Weakness, headache
          •   Fever
          •   Breathing difficulties that may be severe
          •   Anxiety, abdominal cramps, vomiting




    180
                                                   Wounds and bleeding




First aid for an insect bite or sting
   1.   Do a scene survey, then a primary survey. Are there any
        signs of an allergic reaction?
   2.   Looking for a stinger that may still be in the skin. Honey
        bees leave their stinger and venom sac attached to the
        skin. Other bees and wasps do not. If it is there, remove it
        by carefully scraping it and the attached poison sac from
        the skin.




                                                                         5




   3.   For the irritation at the site of the sting, apply rubbing
        alcohol or a paste of baking soda and water. Ice can also be
        used. Don’t use alcohol near the eyes.




                                                                   181
    Wounds and bleeding




    Ticks
    Ticks are found throughout Canada. They drop from the foliage
    onto animals and humans, biting through the skin and anchoring
    themselves to the tissue with barbed mouth parts. A tick will suck
    the host’s (the person or animal) blood for many hours, and may
    become quite large. Once the tick is done feeding, it detaches itself
    and drops off.
    They sometimes carry diseases that can be transmitted to humans.
    If one tick is found, check your body and clothing thoroughly for
    others. Keep the tick for identification by a medical professional.

    First aid for bites from ticks
5         1.   Use a tick removal tool to pull out the tick by sliding the
               tool along the skin and carefully pulling away from the body
          2.   If you do not have a tick removal tool, use tweezers by
               grasping the tick close to the skin and carefully pulling at a
               slow but steady pace. Do not grasp the tick body, as it will
               pop, spraying the contents
          3.   If you don’t have tweezers, wear gloves or
               cover your hand with a plastic bag or tissue
               paper. If the tick is full of blood, wear eye
               protection.
          4.   Keep the dislodged tick and bring it to
               medical help for identification.
          5.   Clean the area and apply an antiseptic to prevent infection.
               Ticks can carry various diseases which may cause symptoms
               several days after exposure. If the tick is found engorged,
               or if the site of the bite shows any sign of infection or rash
               (which may look like a halo), get medical help.

    Leeches
    A leech makes a tiny cut in the skin, which may not be felt at
    the time, and attaches itself to feed on the blood of a human or
    animal. Once a leech is attached, trying to pull it off often doesn’t
    work—the leech may tear into smaller parts, making it even harder
    to remove those parts still attached. This may increase the risk of
    infection.

    182
                                                      Wounds and bleeding




First aid for lesions from leeches
    1.   Detach the leech by first using a fingernail to push the head
         end of the leech off of the skin. The head end is the smaller,
         skinnier part of the leech–not the larger end. After the head
         is released, use a fingernail to push the larger end off.
    2.   Once the leech is removed, there may be some bleeding
         due to the anticoagulant produced by the leech. Wash the
         area with soap and water, and use a baking soda paste or
         ammonia solution to relieve irritation.
    3.   If the site of the bite shows any sign of infection, the
         casualty should get medical help.

Jellyfish
                                                                            5
Jellyfish can be found in any body of water, whether salt water or
fresh, with different varieties being found in Canada. Jellyfish that
have been known to cause death live in tropical climates and have
not been located near Canada. All jellyfish sting their prey using
nematocysts, which in simple terms are “stingers.” These stingers
may contain venom which can be harmful, but more commonly
cause an unpleasant stinging or burning sensation.

First aid for jellyfish stings
    1.   Perform a scene survey and a primary survey.
    2.   Apply as much vinegar as possible to the affected area.
         Vinegar will stop the stingers from releasing venom.
    3.   To help relieve pain, bathe the affected part in warm water,
         as warm as the casualty can tolerate for about 20 minutes.
    4.   Do not apply cold water. Cold water helps the stingers to
         continue releasing venom.
    5.   If signs of infection occur, seek medical help.




                                                                     183
Chapter 6
                               Bone and Joint
                               Injuries




• Injuries to bones
• Injuries to joints
• Head and spinal injuries
• Concussion and compression
• Spinal injuries
• Pelvic injury
• Chest injury
• Strains
• Splinting materials
    Bone and joint injuries




    Chapter 6 Bone and joint injuries
    Injuries to bones, joints and muscles are common and, although
    they are usually not life-threatening, they can be painful and
    debilitating. Appropriate first aid for these injuries can reduce the
    pain and prevent further injury.

    Fractures
    A break or crack in a bone is called a fracture. A fracture is either
    closed or open:
          •   A closed fracture is where the skin over the fracture is not
              broken
          •   An open fracture is where the skin over the fracture is
              broken—this could cause serious infection, even if the
6             wound is very small
    Closed Fracture




    Open Fracture




    186
                                                    Bone and joint injuries




A fracture can be caused by a direct force (e.g. a punch or kick),
an indirect force (e.g. a fall), or by a twisting force. Certain bone
diseases, such as osteoporosis, make bones very brittle and they
can break without much force.
One or more of the following signs and symptoms will be present
when a bone is fractured:
    •   Pain and tenderness—worse when the injury is touched or
        moved
    •   Loss of function—the casualty cannot use the injured part
    •   A wound—the bone ends may be sticking out
    •   Deformity—any unnatural shape or unnatural position of a
        bone or joint
    •   Unnatural movement
    •   Shock—this increases with the severity of the injury                  6
    •   Crepitus—a grating sensation or sound that can often be
        felt or heard when the broken ends of bone rub together
    •   Swelling and bruising—fluid accumulates in the tissues
        around the fracture

Dislocations & Sprains
Ligaments connect bones to other bones to form joints, while
tendons connect muscles to bones. Ligaments limit the range
of movement, support the joint in motion or prevent certain
movements altogether. Joints may be injured when
the bones and surrounding tissues are forced to move
beyond their normal range. When that happens:
    •   The bones may break, resulting in a
        fracture
    •   The ligaments may stretch or tear,
        resulting in a sprain
    •   The bone ends may move out of proper
        position resulting in a dislocation




                                                                       187
    Bone and joint injuries




    Sprains




    A sprain is an injury to a ligament and can range from a stretched to
    a completely torn ligament. Be cautious and give first aid as if the
    injury is serious to avoid further damage and pain. Sprains of the
    wrist, ankle, knee and shoulder are most common. The signs and
    symptoms of sprains may include:
6         •   Pain that may be severe and increase with movement of the
              joint
          •   Loss of function
          •   Swelling and discolouration

    Dislocations
    A dislocation is when the bones of a joint are not in proper
    contact. A force stretches and tears the joint capsule, causing the
    dislocation. Once this occurs, the bones can put pressure on blood
    vessels and nerves, causing circulation and sensation impairments
    below the injury. The most commonly dislocated joints are shoulder,
    elbow, thumb, fingers, jaw, and knee.
    The signs and symptoms of a dislocation are similar to those of a
    fracture, and may include:
          •   Deformity or abnormal appearance, a dislocated shoulder
              may make the arm look longer
          •   Pain and tenderness aggravated by movement
          •   Loss of normal function; the joint may be “locked” in one
              position
          •   Swelling of the joint


    188
                                                      Bone and joint injuries




General first aid for injuries to bones and joints
The aim of first aid for bone and joint injuries is to prevent further
tissue damage and to reduce pain.
    1.   Perform a scene survey and a primary survey.
    2.   Steady and support any obvious fractures or dislocations
         found in the primary survey (during the rapid body survey).
    3.   Do a secondary survey to the extent needed, gently expose
         the injured area. You may have to cut clothing to do this
         without moving the injured part. Examine the entire injured
         area to determine the extent of the injury.
    4.   Check the circulation below the injury. If circulation is
         impaired, medical help is needed urgently.
    5.   Steady and support the injured part and maintain support
         until medical help takes over, or the injury is immobilized.           6
         Protect protruding bones. Do not push the bone ends back
         in. Do not attempt to apply traction to a limb (pull on it)
         or manipulate it in any way.
    6.   If medical help is on the way and will arrive soon, steady
         and support the injury with your hands until they arrive.
    7.   If medical help will be delayed, or if the casualty needs
         to be transported, immobilize the injury. Consider the
         following when making your decision:
            •   Are there other risks to the casualty? Are there risks
                to yourself or others?
            •   If medical help can get to the scene, how long will it
                take?
            •   Do you have the materials needed to properly
                immobilize the injury?
            •   How long will it take to immobilize the injury
                compared to how long it will take for medical help
                to arrive?
    8.   Apply cold to the injury, as appropriate.
    9.   Give ongoing casualty care until medical help arrives.
         Monitor circulation below the injury site.


                                                                         189
    Bone and joint injuries




    Use RICE for injuries to bones, joints and muscles
    Most injuries to bones, joints and muscles benefit from RICE, which
    stands for:
          R – Rest
          I – Immobilize
          C – Cold
          E – Elevate
    Use RICE while waiting for medical help to arrive or while
    transporting a casualty to medical help. Even the most minor
    injuries will benefit from RICE.
    Rest means stopping the activity that caused the injury and staying
    off it until a doctor tells the casualty it is OK to continue. For a minor
    injury, gentle use of the injured part is okay provided the casualty
6   can easily tolerate the pain.
    Immobilize means suspecting a fracture whenever there is an injury
    to an arm or a leg and taking steps to prevent movement of the
    injured limb. Immobilization may mean using a sling for a shoulder
    joint injury or a splint to immobilize the joint above and the joint
    below the injury.

    Cold means applying cold to the injury as soon as you can once the
    injury has been immobilized. The cold narrows the blood vessels,
    reducing pain, swelling and bruising. Use a commercial cold pack,
    an improvised ice pack or a cold compress for more about using
    cold. Apply cold over the entire injured area—15 minutes on,
    15 minutes off.




    190
                                                     Bone and joint injuries




Elevate means raising the injured part if possible. Only elevate if it
will not cause more pain or harm to the casualty. Elevation helps to
reduce swelling and makes it easier for fluids to drain away from the
injury. This in turn, helps reduce swelling (don’t elevate a “locked”
joint).

Head and spinal injuries
Head injuries include skull fractures, concussion and compression.
Such injuries are frequently complicated by unconsciousness.
Fractures at the base of the skull often involve injury to the cervical
spine. For this reason, when you suspect a head injury, you should
also suspect a neck injury.
Injuries associated with the spine/pelvis include fractures, spinal
cord damage, and severe bleeding. The bladder is the organ most
frequently damaged with pelvic injuries.
A head/spinal injury should be suspected whenever the incident
                                                                               6
involves a car accident or a fall, from a height of 6 feet or more. It
should also be suspected if signs and symptoms include:
    •   Fluid from the ears
    •   Headache
    •   Bruising on the head
    •   Casualty complains of pain in the head and neck
    •   Casualty tells you they cannot move or feel
Always suspect head/spinal injury if the casualty is unconscious and
the history is unknown.




                                                                         191
    Bone and joint injuries




    Head injuries
    The following signs and symptoms indicate a possible fracture of
    the skull or facial bones, concussion or compression:
          •   Deformed skull
          •   Swollen, bruised or bleeding scalp
          •   Straw-coloured fluid or blood coming from the nose or
              ear(s)
          •   Bruising around the eyes (black eye) or behind the ears
          •   Nausea, vomiting, especially in children
          •   Confused, dazed, possibly combative
          •   Semi-conscious or unconscious
          •   Stopped breathing or irregular respiration
6         •   Very slow pulse rate
          •   Pupils are of unequal size
          •   Pain at the injury site
          •   Weakened or paralyzed arms and/or legs
          •   Pain when swallowing or moving the jaw
          •   Wounds in the mouth
          •   Knocked-out teeth
          •   Shock
          •   Convulsions

    An unconscious casualty with a head injury may vomit. Be ready
    to turn the casualty to the side (as a unit if possible) and clear the
    airway quickly.




    192
                                                     Bone and joint injuries




Skull fracture
Fractures of the skull may be the result of direct
force or an indirect force that is transmitted
through the bones. Fractures may occur in the
cranium, at the base of the skull, or in the face.
Facial fractures include the nose, the bones
around the eyes, the upper jaw and the lower
jaw. Fractures of the jaw are often complicated by wounds
inside the mouth.

First aid for head injury
First aid for fractures of the skull depends on the fracture site and
the signs. Whenever there is a skull fracture, a spinal injury should
be suspected—give first aid as if there was a neck injury. The head
and neck should be immobilized accordingly.
                                                                               6
    1.   Perform a scene survey. Assess the mechanism of injury. If
         you suspect that there may be a head injury tell the casualty
         not to move and get medical help. Steady and support
         the head with your hands as soon as possible. Perform a
         primary survey.
    2.   If blood or fluid is coming from the ear canal, secure a
         sterile dressing lightly over the ear, making sure fluids can
         drain.
    3.   Protect areas of depression, lumps, bumps, or scalp
         wounds where an underlying skull fracture is suspected.
         Avoid pressure on the fracture site.
    4.   Warn the casualty not to blow their nose if there is blood or
         fluid coming from it. Do not restrict blood flow. Wipe away
         any trickling blood to prevent it from entering the mouth,
         causing breathing difficulties.
    5.   Give ongoing casualty care until medical help takes over.

First aid for fractures of the facial bones and jaw
    1.   Perform a scene survey. If you suspect a head injury, tell
         the casualty not to move and get medical help. Steady
         and support the head with your hands as soon as possible.
         Perform a primary survey. Check the airway and make sure

                                                                        193
    Bone and joint injuries




               there is nothing in the mouth.
          2.   Remove any knocked-out teeth or loose dentures and
               maintain drainage for blood and saliva.
          3.   If there is a suspected head or spinal injury, steady and
               support the casualty in the position found until medical
               help takes over.
          4.   If there is no suspected head or spinal injury:
               •   Place the conscious casualty in a sitting position with
                   head well forward to allow any fluids to drain freely
               •   If the casualty cannot sit comfortably, place them in the
                   recovery position
               •   Place the unconscious breathing casualty in the
                   recovery position.
6         5.   Get medical help and give ongoing casualty care.
    If transporting the casualty on a stretcher, ensure good drainage
    from the mouth and nose so that breathing will not be impaired.

    Concussion and compression
    Concussion is a temporary disturbance of brain function usually
    caused by a blow to the head or neck. The casualty may become
    unconscious but usually for only a few moments. The casualty
    usually recovers quickly, but there is a chance of serious brain injury.
    Use both the mechanism of injury and the signs and symptoms
    below to assess for concussion or compression.
          •    Partial or complete loss of consciousness, usually of short
               duration
          •    Shallow breathing
          •    Nausea and vomiting when regaining consciousness
          •    Casualty says they are (or were) “seeing stars”
          •    Loss of memory of events immediately preceding and
               following the injury
          •    Severe overall headache (not local scalp pain)




    194
                                                      Bone and joint injuries




Compression is a condition of excess pressure on some part of the
brain. It may be caused by a build-up of fluids inside the skull, or
by a depressed skull fracture where the broken bones are putting
pressure on the brain. It is very important to monitor a casualty’s
vital signs and look for other symptoms after a blow to the head.

The signs and symptoms of compression are progressive—they
usually get worse as time goes on, as more and more pressure is
put on the brain.
    •   Loss of consciousness
    •   Decreasing level of consciousness
    •   Nausea and vomiting
    •   Unequal size of pupils
    •   One or both pupils don’t respond to light
Helmets                                                                         6
Helmets are designed to protect the wearer from fractures. They are
not actually designed to protect against concussion or compression
injury. If you see damage to the helmet you should suspect a
concussion or compression injury.

Ongoing casualty care for head injury
When a casualty has received a blow to the head or neck that
causes decreased consciousness or unconsciousness, immediately
suspect a neck injury. Tell the casualty not to move, steady and
support the head. Send for medical help and give ongoing casualty
care.

A casualty with a concussion may appear to recover quickly, but
there is always the threat of serious injury. Tell the casualty to get
medical help right away for a full evaluation of the injury.

If the casualty is unconscious and you must leave them alone,
place them in the recovery position, carefully supporting the head
and neck during any movement. If the casualty is face-up, monitor
breathing continuously.

A casualty who shows signs of compression needs to seek medical
help immediately.

                                                                         195
    Bone and joint injuries




    Spinal injuries
    Injury to the spine threatens the spinal cord
    that runs through it and the nerves that branch
    out from the cord.
    Damage to the spinal cord or nerves can result
    in complete and permanent loss of feeling and
    paralysis below the point of injury. In every
    emergency situation, assess the possibility of
    a spinal injury. If it exists at all, give first aid for
    a spinal injury and get medical help as soon as
    possible.
    Use the history of the scene, especially the
    mechanism of injury, to decide if there is a chance
    of a spinal injury. If the history of the scene
6   suggests a spinal injury, give first aid for a spinal
    injury even if the signs and symptoms below
    are not present.
          •   Swelling and/or bruising at the site of the injury
          •   Numbness, tingling or a loss of feeling in the arms and legs
              on one or both sides of the body
          •   Not able to move arms and/or legs on one or both sides of
              the body
          •   Pain at the injury site
          •   Signs of shock




    196
                                                       Bone and joint injuries




Stabilizing a head or spinal injury
The aim of first aid for spinal injuries is to prevent further injury,
by preventing movement of the injured area. When moving
the casualty is necessary, support them in a way that minimizes
movement of the head and spine.
    1.   As soon as you suspect a head or spinal injury, tell the
         casualty not to move. Steady and support the casualty’s
         head and neck as soon as you can—show a bystander how
         to do this:
         •   Keep elbows on the ground to keep arms steady.
         •   Firmly hold the head with fingers along the line of the
             jaw.


                                                                                 6




    2.   Show a second bystander how to steady and support the
         feet. The head and feet should be continuously supported
         until either the casualty is fully immobilized or medical help
         takes over.




                                                                          197
    Bone and joint injuries




          3.   Perform a primary survey. If the casualty is unresponsive,
               check for breathing before opening the airway.
          4.   Do a secondary survey to the extent needed.
          5.   If medical help will arrive at the scene, steady and support
               the casualty in the position found and give ongoing
               casualty care. Continue to steady and support the head and
               feet until help arrives.

    Pelvic injury
    Signs and symptoms of pelvic injury include:
          •    Signs of shock (casualty could be bleeding internally)
          •    Casualty cannot stand or walk
          •    Urge to urinate
6         •    Casualty cannot urinate or there is blood in the urine
          •    Sharp pain in the groin and small of the back
          •    Increased pain when moving

    Immobilizing a fractured pelvis
    Give first aid as you would for a spinal injury. Steady and support
    the casualty in the position found while waiting for medical help.
    Stabilize the pelvic area with heavy padding such as blankets on
    either side.




    198
                                                   Bone and joint injuries




Chest injury
Signs and symptoms include:
    •    Pain at injury site when casualty moves, coughs or breathes
         deeply
    •    Shallow breathing
    •    Casualty guards injury
    •    Deformity and discolouration
    •    May be a wound
    •    May cough up frothy blood
    •    May show signs of shock

First aid for chest injury
First aid for injured ribs or breastbone aims to reduce the chance of        6
further injury, to minimize pain and to make breathing easier.
A fracture is very painful and causes shallow breathing. Start
Emergency Scene Management.
    1.   Expose the injured area and look for a wound. If there is a
         wound, put a dressing on the wound and get medical help
         quickly.
    2.   If injuries permit, place the casualty in a semi-sitting
         position, leaning slightly toward the injured side—this
         should help breathing. Hand support over the injured area
         may make breathing easier.
    3.   Support the arm on the injured side in a St. John tubular
         sling to restrict movement.
    4.   Give ongoing casualty care, monitor breathing often. Get
         medical help.




                                                                      199
    Bone and joint injuries




    Flail chest
    A flail chest occurs when several ribs in the same area are broken in
    more than one place. The flail segment moves opposite to the rest
    of the chest while breathing, which causes pain for the casualty.
    Signs and symptoms of a flail chest include:
          •    Paradoxical chest movement—this is the sign that will tell
               you whether there is a flail chest
          •    Breathing is very painful, and the casualty may support the
               injured area
          •    Bruising at the injury site

    First aid for a flail chest
          1.   Steady and support the head and neck. Perform a primary
6              survey. If the casualty complains of difficulty breathing and
               pain in the chest, expose and examine the injury.
          2.   Support the injured area with your hand—this may make
               breathing easier. Give first aid for ineffective breathing if
               needed.
          3.   Secure the arm to the chest wall with a broad bandage to
               prevent movement of the arm.
          4.   Give ongoing casualty care until medical help takes over.
    Pneumothorax
    A serious complication of a chest injury that requires immediate
    medical help
    The pleural space is the space between the lungs and the chest
    wall that is filled by the lungs. The lungs expand into this space
    as the chest cavity changes volume because of the action of the
    diaphragm and rib cage. But if air gets into the space, the lung on
    that side won’t expand into it, and it will collapse. A pneumothorax
    occurs when air gets into the pleural space. It is life-threatening
    because the lungs can collapse and cause the person severe
    breathing difficulties




    200
                                                     Bone and joint injuries




Splinting materials




A splint is any material used to prevent fractured bones from
moving unnecessarily.
A good splint is:
    •   Rigid enough to support the injured limb
                                                                               6
    •   Well-padded for support and comfort
    •   Long enough, which means:
        •    For a fracture between 2 joints, it extends beyond the
             joints above and below the fracture
        •    For an injured joint, it’s long enough for the limb to be
             secured so the joint can’t move
Commercial splints
There are many commercial splints available. You may have access
to one of these if the incident happened at a workplace, sporting
event, etc. It is important to be familiar with the splints before use.
Always follow the manufacturer’s directions.




                                                                        201
    Bone and joint injuries




    Improvised splints
    A splint can be improvised from any material, as long as it works to
    immobilize the injury.
    The casualty’s own body can be used as a splint; one leg can be
    splinted to the other for example. This is called an “anatomical”
    splint.
    Other materials needed for splinting
    To put the splint on, you will need materials for padding and
    bandages.
    Padding does two things:
          •   It fills in the natural hollows between the body and the
              splint, ensuring the injured limb is properly supported
          •   It makes the splint more comfortable
6 Always pad between a splint and the injured limb, and between two
    body parts to be bandaged together.
    When using bandages:
          •   Make sure they are wide enough to provide firm support
              without discomfort
          •   Pass them under the natural hollows of the body—go under
              the knee, the small of the back, the hollow behind the
              ankles
          •   Tie them tightly enough to prevent movement, but not
              so tight they cut off circulation. Check circulation every
              15 minutes below any bandages you’ve tied




    202
                                                    Bone and joint injuries




First aid for specific bone & joint injuries
Collarbone/shoulder blade fracture
Signs and symptoms include:
   •    Pain at injury site
   •    Swelling and deformity
   •    Loss of function of the arm on the side of the injury
   •    Casualty holds and protects the arm if they can, and may tilt
        the head to the injured side
Possible complications
   •    Circulation to the arm below the injury may be impaired or
        cut off

First aid for a fractured collarbone or shoulder blade                        6
   1.   Check circulation below the injury. If circulation is impaired,
        get medical help quickly.
   2.   Immobilize the arm in the position of
        most comfort. A St. John tubular
        sling may work.
   3.   Secure the arm to the chest with
        a broad bandage to prevent
        movement of the arm. Pad under
        the elbow, if necessary, to keep
        the arm in the most comfortable
        position. Tie the bandage on
        the uninjured side—don’t tie it
        so tightly that the arm is pulled
        out of position. Pad under the
        knots for comfort.
   4.   Check circulation below the injury.
        If circulation is impaired, and it was not before, loosen the
        sling and bandage.




                                                                       203
    Bone and joint injuries




    Immobilizing a dislocated joint
    Immobilize the limb in the position of most comfort—usually the
    position found.
    To immobilize a dislocated shoulder, if the arm will bend:
          •   Use a St. John tubular sling to transfer the weight of the
              arm to the other side
          •   Use broad bandages to prevent movement
          •   Pad under the elbow for support
    If the arm will not bend:
          •   Support the weight of the arm with a bandage around the
              neck
          •   Bandage the arm to the body to prevent movement
6         •   Pad under the elbow, if necessary, to keep the arm in the
              most comfortable position
          •   The casualty may want to hold the injured arm
    The success of the method you use depends on whether it stops
    the injured limb from moving—which causes pain and could cause
    further injury. Once the injury is immobilized, apply cold to help
    reduce pain and swelling providing the casualty can tolerate the
    added weight.
    Monitor circulation below the injury often—check the skin colour
    and temperature, use a nail bed test and check for a pulse.
    Compare the injured side with the uninjured side. If circulation
    becomes impaired after immobilizing the injury, loosen the
    bandages. If circulation remains impaired, get medical help quickly.




    204
                                                  Bone and joint injuries




Immobilizing the upper arm
To immobilize an open fracture of the upper arm (humerus):
   1.   Expose the injury site. Cover the wound with a sterile
        dressing and check circulation.
   2.   Pad and bandage the dressings. Pad lengthwise on both
        sides of the fracture site. Padding should be bulky enough
        to protect any protruding bone ends. Hold the padding in
        place with tape then bandage dressings tightly enough to
        hold padding and dressings in place.
   3.   An arm sling provides full support for the arm—broad
        bandages above and below fracture site prevent arm
        movement. Pad under the elbow as needed to hold the
        arm in the position of comfort.

                                                                            6




                                                                     205
    Bone and joint injuries




    Immobilizing an injured elbow
    The elbow can be severely sprained, fractured or dislocated.
    Immobilize the injury in the position found, if possible, or in the
    position of greatest comfort.
          1.   Expose the injury and look for any open wounds. Check
               circulation below the injury and compare it with the other
               side. If circulation is impaired, get medical help quickly.
          2.   If the elbow is bent so the arm is in front of the chest,
               immobilize the arm in an arm sling. Leave the sling loose
               at the elbow. Pad under the elbow, if necessary, to keep
               the arm in the most comfortable position and use a broad
               bandage to limit movement.
          3.   If the elbow will not bend, support the arm at the wrist and
               use broad bandages and padding to immobilize the arm.
6              Check circulation below the injury and compare it with the
               other side—if it is impaired, and it wasn’t before, adjust the
               sling and/or bandages.




    206
                                                    Bone and joint injuries




Immobilizing the forearm and wrist
   1.   Examine the injury and decide the best position for
        splinting—this is usually in the position found. Have the
        casualty or a bystander steady and support the injured arm.
   2.   Measure the splint against the uninjured arm to make sure
        it is the right size. Pad the splint for comfort and to support
        the fracture. Position the arm on the splint with as little
        movement as possible.
   3.   Once the splint is in position, have
        the casualty or bystander support it
        while you secure the splint.
   4.   Start above the injury and
        bandage the splint and the arm
        snugly, but not too tightly. Leave
        the fingertips visible so you can                                     6
        check circulation below the injury and
        bandages.
   5.   Use an arm sling to support the arm and hand, and prevent
        movement of the elbow with the fingertips exposed so you
        can check circulation.




                                                                       207
    Bone and joint injuries




    Immobilizing an injured hand
    When you suspect bones in the hand are fractured:
          1.   Examine the injured hand and decide the best position for
               splinting—this is usually in the position of function. Have
               the casualty or a bystander steady and support the injury.
               If there are open wounds, place non-stick sterile dressings
               between the fingers to prevent the fingers sticking
               together.
          2.   Measure the splint against the uninjured hand and arm to
               make sure it is the right size.




6
          3.   Position the arm on the splint with as little movement as
               possible.




          Using a cushion as a splint
          •    A cushion or pillow works well because it lets the hand rest
               in the position of function and it is padded but also firm. It
               fully supports the wrist and lower arm.
          •    Secure the pillow with 2 broad bandages, making sure
               there is no pressure on the hand.
          •    Leave fingertips visible to check for circulation.




    208
                                                       Bone and joint injuries




    Using a board
    •    A board works well because it is rigid, but, you must use
         padding to keep the hand in the position of function.
    •    Secure the splint with a roller bandage. Leave fingertips
         visible to check for circulation.




    4.   Immobilize the arm in an arm sling tied to keep the lower
         arm and hand supported.
                                                                                 6
Position of function
The position of function is the position the uninjured hand naturally
takes—palm down and fingers slightly curled. This position is safer
and more comfortable than trying to flatten the hand against a flat
surface.
Immobilizing an injured finger or thumb
Immobilize a fractured or dislocated finger or thumb in the position
found.
    1.   Expose the injury. Check the circulation below the injury.
    2.   Immobilize the finger or thumb in the position of most
         comfort, which is usually the position of function. Use a
         splint, or if a splint is not available, secure the injured finger
         or thumb to the uninjured finger beside it. Use padding to
         provide extra support.
    3.   Put on a St. John tubular sling to keep the injury elevated.
         Be careful not to put pressure on the injury. Check
         circulation below the injury.
    4.   Give ongoing casualty care and get medical help.




                                                                          209
    Bone and joint injuries




    Fractured upper leg (femur)
    Signs and symptoms
          •    Pain, perhaps severe
          •    The foot and leg may roll outward
          •    Deformity and shortening of the leg
    Possible complications
          •    There can be internal bleeding, causing
               severe shock

    Immobilizing an injured upper leg
    (femur)
    A common fracture of the upper leg is a break at
6   the neck of the femur. This is often referred to as a broken hip, and
    most commonly happens to elderly people. In a younger, healthy
    person, great force is needed to fracture the upper leg—always
    assess for a head or spinal injury.




          1.   Have a bystander steady and support the injured limb.
          2.   Gather the splinting materials. Measure the splint(s) against
               the uninjured leg. Put bandages into position. Pad the
               splints and position them as shown.
          3.   Tie the bandages from chest to ankle—from the stable end
               to the unstable end.
          4.   Give ongoing casualty care. Get medical help.
    210
                                               Bone and joint injuries




5.   If you are using a long and a short splint, place bandages at
     the ankles, calves, knees, above and below the fracture,
     hips and chest.




6.   Push bandages under the natural hollows of the body and
     position as shown above                                             6
7.   Place splints just below the armpit and just below the groin
8.   Extend both splints below the foot
9.   Tie off all bandages on the splint




                                                                  211
    Bone and joint injuries




    Immobilizing an injured knee
    Have a bystander steady and support the injured leg. Expose and
    assess the injury. If the leg is bent, keep it in the position of comfort.
    Depending on the injury, the casualty may be able to straighten
    the leg with your help. Don’t try to straighten the leg if the pain
    increases or the leg does not move easily. If the leg won’t straighten
    easily or without increased pain, splint in the position found.
    If the leg is straight
          1.   Expose and assess the injury




6


          2.   Carefully lift the injured leg and position a padded splintt




          3.   Adjust the pads to fit the natural hollows of the leg




    212
                                                 Bone and joint injuries




   4.   Position 2 broad bandages and secure the splint to the
        leg—use a figure-8 at the ankle




If the leg is bent
   1.   Expose and assess the injury
                                                                           6




   2.   Position five broad bandages under the leg—two above
        the knee and three below




                                                                    213
    Bone and joint injuries




          3.   Position padded splints on the inside and outside of the leg




          4.   Secure the splint with the bandages, keeping the leg in the
               bent position
6




    Immobilizing an open fracture of the lower leg (tibia
    and/or fibula)
    When there is an open fracture, give first aid for the wound first
    and then immobilize the fracture. For the wound, apply a sterile
    dressing to prevent further contamination. To stop bleeding from
    the wound, apply pressure around the fracture, but not on it. Apply
    a dressing with padding on both sides of the fracture site. Secure
    this with a broad bandage tied tightly enough to put pressure on
    the padding. Always check circulation before and after dressing a
    wound of this type.




    214
                                                     Bone and joint injuries




A fractured lower leg is a common sports injury and open fractures
are common. Immobilize a closed fracture the same way but
without the dressings and bandages over the wound.




A fracture is “open” when the skin is broken—the bone may stick
out
    1.   Expose the injury. Clothing is removed by cutting to
         minimize movement of the injured leg.
                                                                               6




    2.   Show a bystander how to steady and support the leg.
         Check the circulation below the injury. Give first aid for the
         open fracture wound. Leave the shoe on unless there is a
         wound to be examined.
    3.   Cover the wound with a sterile dressing.




                                                                        215
    Bone and joint injuries




          4.   The dressing should extend well beyond the edges of the
               wound. Put bulky padding lengthwise on both sides of the
               fracture, over the dressing, to protect the bone end and
               tape the padding in place.




          5.   Tie a bandage over the padding and dressing tightly
6              enough to put pressure on the padding, but not tight
               enough to cut off circulation—check circulation below the
               injury once the bandage is tied. Make sure there is no
               pressure on the bone ends.




    216
                                                 Bone and joint injuries




6.   Immobilize the lower leg. Position the bandages and
     splints. Use splints long enough to extend from the groin to
     below the foot. The bystander doesn’t let go of the leg until
     the first aider tells them to, which is after the last bandage
     is tied. Tie all knots on the splint for comfort. Position broad
     bandages to be tied at the thigh, knee, above and below
     the fracture and at the ankle.




                                                                           6


7.   Tie the bandages starting at the thigh (the stable end) and
     working down. The bandage at the ankles is tied as a
     figure-8.




                                                                    217
    Bone and joint injuries




          8.   Check the circulation below the injury; give ongoing
               casualty care. Get medical help.




6
    If you don’t have splints ...
          •    Use the uninjured leg as an anatomical splint by tying the
               legs together.
          •    Position padding between the legs (rolled-up blanket).
          •    Position and tie broad bandages at the thighs, knees,
               above the injury, below the injury and at the ankles. Tie a
               figure-8 at the ankles.
          •    Tie knots on padding for comfort




    218
                                                     Bone and joint injuries




Immobilizing an injured ankle
The ankle should be immobilized whenever you suspect a sprain
or a fracture. If the injury doesn’t seem serious, or if the journey to
medical help will be smooth, use a blanket splint or pillow splint to
immobilize the ankle:
    1.   Check circulation below the injury.
    2.   Loosen footwear and immobilize the ankle with a pillow or
         rolled-up blanket and two broad bandages. Make sure the
         splint extends beyond the ankle.




                                                                               6




    3.   Secure the pillow with two broad bandages—use a figure8
         at the ankle.




    4.   Check circulation below the injury. Give ongoing casualty
         care and get medical help.




                                                                        219
    Bone and joint injuries




    Immobilizing an injured foot or toe
          1.   Check circulation below the injury.
          2.   Immobilize the ankle using a double figure‑8:
               •   Untie shoe laces and tie the first figure‑8 beginning at
                   the sole of the foot and tying toward the leg.
               •   Tie the second figure‑8 by wrapping the ends around
                   the leg, crossing in front of the ankle and tying off on
                   the sole of the foot. Tie off at the sole.




6




    Immobilize a fractured toe by taping it to the uninjured toe Beside
    it. Keep checking circulation, the injured area may swell.




    220
                                                   Bone and joint injuries




Strains
When a muscle or tendon is moved beyond its normal range, this
results in a strain, which is a stretch or tear injury.
The signs and symptoms of a strain often show up many hours
after the injury.
   •    Sudden sharp pain in the strained muscle
   •    Swelling of the muscles causing severe cramps
   •    Bruising and muscle stiffness
   •    Casualty may not be able to use the affected body part
        (loss of function)

First aid for strains
   1.   Perform a scene survey and a primary survey. Have the
        casualty stop the activity that caused the injury.                   6
   2.   Place the casualty in a position of
        comfort and assess the injury. If
        there is loss of function, immobilize
        the injury as for a fracture. Manage
        with RICE
        •   Rest
        •   Immobilization
        •   Cold
        •   Elevation
   3.   Give ongoing casualty
        care. Get medical help.
        Position the casualty on the back with knees raised, or any
        preferable comfortable position at rest.




                                                                      221
Chapter 7
                                  Other First Aid
                                  Emergencies




• Diabetes
• Seizures and convulsions
• Opioid overdose
• Heat •and  cold emergencies
          Introduction
• Cold-related  injuries
       • First aid  and the law
• Heat-related
       • Safetyinjuries
                 and personal
• Poisoning
          protection
• Emergency    childbirth and
       • Communication      with the
  miscarriage
          casualty
• Mental  healthatawareness
       • Help      the emergency scene
       • Injury and illness
       • Stress management in
          emergency situations
    Other first aid emergencies




    Chapter 7 Other first aid emergencies
    Diabetes
    Diabetes is a condition in which there is either not enough insulin in
    the blood or there is enough insulin but the cells cannot use the
    insulin properly. Insulin is a hormone produced in the pancreas that
    regulates the amount of glucose in the blood. With diabetes, sugar
    builds up in the blood and the cells don’t get the energy they need
    or the blood sugar levels can go abnormally low.
    A person with diabetes may take medication
    by mouth or injection, and carefully controls
    what they eat (the source of energy) and
    their level of exercise (the use of energy). A
    diabetic emergency occurs when there is too
    much or too little insulin in the blood.
          •    Hypoglycemia—not enough sugar, too
               much insulin
7         •    Hyperglycemia—too much sugar, not enough
               insulin

    First aid for diabetic emergencies
    The aim of first aid in a diabetic emergency is to keep the casualty’s
    condition from getting worse while you get medical help.
          1.   Perform a scene survey, then do a primary survey.
          2.   If the casualty is conscious, ask what is wrong.
          3.   A diabetic casualty may have glucose tablets for treating
               hypoglycemia. Help them take their tablets if they are able
               to respond and swallow; repeat if symptoms persist after 10
               minutes.
          4.   If glucose tablets are not available, use other types of
               dietary sugars (in order of preference): glucose candy (e.g.
               Mentos), sucrose candy (e.g. Skittles), jelly beans, orange
               juice, fructose (e.g. fruit leather), and whole milk.
          5.   Give ongoing casualty care. Send for medical help



    224
                                               Other first aid emergencies




      Causes, signs and symptoms of diabetic
                   emergencies
                      Hypoglycemia          Hyperglycemia (needs
                      (needs sugar)               insulin)
Time to develop   Develops very         Develops over hours or
                  quickly               days
Possible cause    •     Took too        •     Did not take enough
                        much insulin          insulin
                        or oral         •     Eating too much food
                        diabetes
                        medication      •     Less exercise than
                                              usual
                  •     Not eaten
                        enough, or      •     Casualty has an
                        vomited               ongoing illness and
                                              needs more insulin
                  •     More
                        exercise than

Pulse/breathing
                        usual
                  Strong and            Weak and rapid/deep and
                                                                             7
                  rapid/shallow         sighing
Skin condition    Sweaty, pale and      Flushed, dry and warm
                  cold
Level of          Faintness to          Drowsy, becoming
consciousness     unconscious           unconscious
Other signs and   •     Headache        •     Thirsty, then nausea
symptoms          •     Confused,             and vomiting
                        irritable and   •     Frequent urination
                        aggressive      •     Breath has a nail
                  •     Trembling,            polish (acetone) like
                        staggering            odour
                  •     Difficulty
                        speaking




                                                                      225
    Other first aid emergencies




    Seizures and convulsions
    A seizure is caused by abnormal electrical activity in the brain.
    In a partial seizure, only part of the brain is affected. The person
    may experience a tingling or twitching in one area of the body. In
    a generalized seizure, the whole brain is affected and the person
    loses consciousness and may have convulsions. A convulsion is an
    abnormal muscle contraction, or series of muscle contractions, that
    the person cannot control.

    Epilepsy is a disorder of the nervous system characterized by
    seizures. Many people with seizure disorders like epilepsy take
    medication to control the condition. Other causes of seizures
    include:
          •   Head or brain injury
          •   Stroke
          •   Brain infection

7         •
          •
              Drug overdose
              A high fever in infants and children
    With epilepsy, the person may know that a seizure is about to occur
    because of a brief sensation they experience, called an aura. The
    aura, which may be a hallucinated sound, smell, or a feeling of
    movement in the body, is often felt just before a seizure.
    A typical generalized seizure has two phases:
    The “tonic” phase involves a sudden loss of consciousness causing
    the person to fall. The person’s body becomes rigid for up to a
    minute during which the face and neck may turn bluish.
    In the “clonic” phase, convulsions occur, breathing is noisy, frothy
    saliva may appear around the mouth and the teeth may grind.
    A major seizure can come on very suddenly, but seldom lasts longer
    than a few minutes.
    When the seizure is over, the muscles gradually relax and the
    person regains consciousness. After the seizure, the person may not
    remember what happened. They may appear dazed and confused,
    and feel exhausted and sleepy.



    226
                                                Other first aid emergencies




Signs and symptoms of a generalized seizure
    •    A sudden cry, stiffening of the body and loss of
         consciousness causing the person to fall
    •    Noisy breathing and frothy saliva at the mouth
    •    The body jerks
    •    Breathing may stop or be irregular for a minute—the
         casualty may turn blue
    •    Loss of bladder and bowel control

First aid for a seizure or convulsion
First aid for a seizure aims to protect the casualty from injury during
convulsions and to keep the airway open while the casualty is
unconscious.
    1.   Perform a scene survey. Make the area safe—clear away
         objects that could cause injury. Clear onlookers away to
         ensure the casualty’s privacy.
During convulsions:                                                           7
    •    Do not restrict the casualty’s movements. Protect them from
         injury.
    •    Carefully loosen tight clothing, especially around the neck.
    •    Place something soft under the head.
    •    Do not try to put anything in the mouth, between the
         teeth or to hold the tongue. Perform a primary survey after
         convulsions are finished.
    •    Place the unconscious casualty into the recovery position
         and clear any fluids from the mouth or nose.
    •    Do a secondary survey to see if the casualty was injured
         during the seizure; give first aid for any injuries.
    •    Give ongoing casualty care, monitoring breathing, keeping
         the casualty warm and allowing them to rest.
    •    Don’t give the casualty any liquids during or immediately
         after a seizure




                                                                       227
    Other first aid emergencies




    Call for medical help if:
          •    The casualty is unconscious for more than five minutes, or
               has a second major seizure within a few minutes
          •    This is the person’s first seizure or the cause of the seizure is
               unknown (ask the casualty when they regain consciousness)

    Fever emergency in an infant or child
    A rapid rise in temperature to 40°C (104°F) or higher can cause
    convulsions in infants and children. A fever emergency is when the
    temperature, taken in the armpit (or follow manufacture directions
    on digital thermometer), is:
          •    38o C (100.5o F) or higher for an infant
          •    40o C (104o F) or higher for a child

    First aid for a fever emergency in an infant or child
          1.   Perform a scene survey, then do a primary survey.
7         2.   Call a doctor immediately and follow their advice. If the
               doctor can’t be reached give acetaminophen (e.g. Tempra®
               or Tylenol®) or children’s ibuprofen (not ASA) according
               to the directions on the label. This should bring down the
               child’s temperature.
          3.   Encourage the fully conscious child to drink clear fluids.
          4.   If the temperature doesn’t go down, sponge the child with
               lukewarm water for about 20 minutes, their temperature will
               go down quickly if the wet skin is exposed to air.




          5.   Dry and dress the child in comfortable but not overly warm
               clothing. Monitor the child’s temperature and repeat steps
               3 to 5, as necessary, until medical help is reached.
    228
                                               Other first aid emergencies




    6.   If the child has a convulsion:
         •   Do not restrain the child, but protect them from injury
         •   Loosen constrictive clothing
    7.   When the convulsions stop, perform a primary survey.
    8.   Give ongoing care; place the child into the best recovery
         position for their age.
Do not give ASA (e.g. Aspirin®) to children or adolescents because
it may cause Reye’s syndrome, a life-threatening condition.
Do not use cold water when sponging the child—this may cause
more serious problems. Only use lukewarm water.

Opioid Overdose
Opioids are a class of drug that affect the opioid receptors in the
brain and produce a morphine-like effect. Frequently prescribed
for pain relief, they can also be used for suppressing diarrhea and
coughs.
Common examples of opioids include morphine, hydrocodone,                    7
oxycodone, codeine, and fentanyl. These drugs are marketed under
names such as Vicodin®, OxyContin® and Percocet®.
Side effects, which are magnified when too much of the drug is
taken, include:
    •    Nausea
    •    Constipation
    •    Respiratory depression
    •    Sedation
    •    Euphoria
Opioids are a common drug of abuse among recreational users due
to their euphoric side effects.
Fentanyl use has emerged as a public health crisis in many
jurisdictions. It is 100 times more potent than morphine and has
a very rapid onset, which has made it a leading cause of fatal
overdoses among recreational drug users. Fentanyl is commonly
used in Emergency Medicine for rapid, effective pain control.


                                                                      229
   Other first aid emergencies




   Even small amounts of fentanyl can lead to severe reactions when
   misused. Fentanyl is a white, tasteless drug and has no smell,
   meaning it cannot be detected when it is mixed with other drugs.
   In Canada, fentanyl is being mixed (“cut”) into many street drugs
   to increase their potency. The most common drugs being cut with
   fentanyl are heroin and cocaine. Another problem facing Canada is
   the proliferation of counterfeit pills on the black market that have
   been mixed with fentanyl, the most common being Oxycontin®.
   Prescriptions should be filled only at a pharmacy to ensure safety.
   In 2017, Health Canada found 3,987 people died from opioid
   overdose across the country. Of those, 72 percent were related to
   fentanyl.
   Carfentanyl is an even more potent and deadly opioid, which has
   been found in Canada’s recreational drug supply. Carfentanyl is 100
   times more powerful than fentanyl and used in veterinary medicine.
   A single grain of Carfentanyl, the size of a grain of salt, can cause a
   fatal overdose.

7 Risk Factors
   Potentially anyone can be at risk of an opioid overdose, though
   some populations are at higher risk.
   Recreational drug users – either seeking a greater high, or
   unknowingly using fentanyl that has been cut into their regular
   drugs to increase potency.
   Youth – either knowingly when experimenting with drugs; or
   unknowingly when fentanyl is used as a cutting agent.
   Pain sufferers – when prescriptions run out or medication tolerance
   develops, some resort to street drugs to manage pain and
   addiction.
   Elderly – medication error may result in inappropriately high doses.




   230
                                                 Other first aid emergencies




Signs and Symptoms of a Suspected Opioid Overdose
An opioid overdose will display some or all of the following signs
and symptoms:
    •   A scene survey or history of the incident indicating
        potential drug use
    •   Excessive drowsiness or loss of consciousness
    •   Slow or absent breathing
    •   Cool, sweaty skin that is pale or bluish (cyanosis)Cyanosis
    •   Gurgling or snoring sounds
    •   Constricted pupils (“pinpoint pupils”)

Naloxone
Naloxone (or Narcan®) is an opioid inhibitor. It binds to the same
receptors in the brain that would normally bind opioids and blocks
the opioids from binding and taking effect. Naloxone is available as
a nasal spray or as an injection.
If you are in contact with an at-risk group, you are encouraged to
                                                                               7
have a naloxone kit available and ensure it is properly maintained
and not expired. Most provinces provide naloxone kits free. Visit
your pharmacy or local addiction clinic to obtain a naloxone kit.




                                                                        231
    Other first aid emergencies




    First Aid for a Suspected Opioid Overdose
    First aid for an opioid overdose is a combination of rescue
    breathing and administration of naloxone (if trained and available).
    Rescue breathing is the same as breaths delivered during CPR,
    except without chest compressions. Deliver one breath every 5
    seconds ensuring the chest rises.
    If you suspect the casualty is having an overdose, follow these first
    aid steps:
          1.   Perform a scene survey. Make sure the area is safe for you
               to be in - be aware of risks from people in the area as well
               as drug paraphernalia.
          2.   Use SAVE ME to remember the steps:
             S - Stimulate. Shake, shout, and activate EMS
             A - Airway. Open the airway
             V - Ventilate. Deliver one breath every 5 seconds ensuring
                  the chest rises
7            E - Evaluate. Are these steps helping?
             M - Medication. Prepare and deliver a dose of naloxone if
                  available and you are trained.
             E - Evaluate. Did the naloxone help? You should see
                  improvement within 2-3 minutes.
    If a casualty is not breathing, begin CPR. Rescue breaths are
    delivered to assist a casualty having an overdose if they are
    breathing on their own, but at a lower rate.
    Check local protocols if naloxone is delivered before or after
    rescue breaths/CPR have been started.
    When possible, have another rescuer perform rescue breaths
    while you prepare and deliver a dose of naloxone. If there is
    no improvement after 2 to 3 minutes, deliver a second dose of
    naloxone.
    Caution: Naloxone reverses the effects of an opioid overdose,
    which may cause the casualty to become aggressive or combative;
    or cause a seizure, vomiting, and a fast heart rate. Ensure your
    safety and be prepared to assist with these other conditions if they
    happen.


    232
                                                Other first aid emergencies




Environmental Emergencies
Environmental emergencies are a group of injuries and illnesses that
arise due to extreme temperatures and/or prolonged exposure. The
body does not function well when it is too hot or too cold

These emergencies encompass heat-related illnesses such as heat
exhaustion and heat stroke; as well as cold-related emergencies
such as hypothermia and frostbite. In all environmental
emergencies, the focus is to return the casualty’s body temperature
to a normal range.

Cold-related injuries
Core body temperature drops when the body loses more heat than
it produces. In an outdoor emergency, heat loss by conduction
and convection (wet and wind) are often the main contributors to
hypothermia.
The body has a number of ways to minimize heat loss and keep the
body core warm. One of the first things the body does when it is              7
losing heat is start shivering. If the
body keeps getting colder, the
blood vessels in the arms, legs
and at the skin surface get
smaller. This keeps the blood in
the core, where it is warmest.
If heat loss continues, the body
processes get slower, including
thinking, muscular action and the
senses. Shivering will become
uncontrollable and then will slow
down and eventually stop. The muscles get stiff and movements
become jerky. Thinking is confused, speech difficult and the senses
dulled. The heart and breathing rates slow down and the person
eventually loses consciousness. At this point, the condition is very
serious. The heartbeat becomes unsteady and faint, and finally the
heart stops.
When the heart stops beating, the person is considered dead.
However, when body tissues are cold, they aren’t damaged as
easily by a lack of oxygen. For this reason, there is often a chance of
                                                                       233
    Other first aid emergencies




    resuscitating a hypothermic person who doesn’t show any signs of
    life. This means that as long as you aren’t putting yourself or others
    at risk, you should continue your rescue efforts to get a hypothermic
    casualty to medical help.
    Hypothermia
    The normal temperature of the body’s core is 37° C (98.6° F). If the
    body core temperature drops more than two degrees, the body’s
    tissues cannot function properly. This state of generalized cooling
    is called hypothermia. Hypothermia, often referred to as exposure,
    kills many Canadians each year—but it is a condition that can be
    detected and corrected by a first aider if recognized early.
    Anyone can become hypothermic, but the following groups are
    especially prone:
           •     Elderly people–they often have poor circulation, less ability
                 to sense the cold, and may be on medication that promotes
                 heat loss
           •     Babies–have less ability to recover from mild and moderate
                 hypothermia because they lose heat more quickly and their
7          •
                 bodies don’t control body heat as well
                 People who are already weakened due to illness, injury,
                 lack of food, fatigue or through the use of alcohol or drugs
           •     Teenagers–they often under-dress for the weather
                 condition

                             Signs of hypothermia
               Sign           Mild          Moderate             Severe
            Pulse       Normal           Slow and weak     Weak, irregular or
                                                           absent
          Breathing     Normal           Slow and          Slow or absent
                                         shallow
      Appearance        Shivering,       Shivering         Shivering has
                        slurred speech   violently,        stopped
                                         clumsy,
                                         stumbling,
                                         pupils dilated,
                                         skin bluish
     Mental state       Conscious but    Confused,         Unconscious
                        withdrawn or     sleepy
                        disinterested    irrational


    234
                                                   Other first aid emergencies




                How the body loses heat
                Examples and prevention
 Heat loss       Explanation          Example              Prevention

 Radiation     Heat radiates       A lot of heat       Wear warm
               from the body       radiates from       clothes.
               into the air        the skin.
               around it.

 Breathing     Cold air is         The steam           Wear a parka with
               inhaled, warmed     you see when        a “tunnel” hood
               by the body and     you exhale on       or “ski-tube”—the
               exhaled, causing    a cold day is       air you breath will
               heat loss.          cold air that       be warmer than
                                   your body has       the outside air.
                                   just warmed,
                                   and lost heat in
                                   doing so.

Evaporation    Body heat           Sweating is how     Keep your skin as
               is used to          your body tries     dry as possible.          7
               evaporate liquid    to keep cool on
               on the skin.        a hot day.

Conduction     Heat moves          Sitting on the      Don’t get wet.
               directly from       cold ground         Wear fabric next
               the body to         or wearing wet      to your skin that
               a cold object       clothing—your       moves the wet
               that the body is    heat moves          away
               touching.           from you into
                                   the ground or
                                   wet clothing.

Convection     The thin layer      The wind            Wear windproof
               of warm air         blows through       clothing with snug
(Wind chill)
               around the body     openings in         cuffs and collars to
               is replaced by      your clothing       keep the wind out.
               cooler air, which   and blows the
               the body must       warm air against
               now heat.           your skin away.




                                                                           235
   Other first aid emergencies




   Signs of hypothermia
   There are three stages of hypothermia: mild, moderate and
   severe, but it may be hard to tell exactly when one stage ends and
   another begins. Body temperatures are not listed here because the
   first aider has no practical way to take the temperature of the body’s
   core.
   The key to successful first aid for hypothermia is recognizing
   the casualty’s condition as soon as possible, and preventing
   hypothermia from getting worse. Hypothermia is the obvious
   thing to look for on a cold winter day, but it is less obvious when
   the temperature is above zero. Be on the lookout for hypothermia
   whenever the temperature is below 20o C, the weather is windy,
   wet or both, or the casualty is in one of the groups at risk for
   hypothermia. Don’t forget yourself—as soon as you begin to
   shiver, think “I’ve got to prevent further heat loss.” If you don’t,
   hypothermia will soon affect your mind, and you won’t be able to
   think clearly enough to take the right actions.

7 First aid for hypothermia
   First aid for hypothermia aims to prevent further heat loss and get
   medical help.
         1.   Perform a scene survey and a primary survey.
         2.   Take measures to prevent further heat loss:
              •   Move the casualty out of the cold environment. If you
                  cannot move indoors, protect the casualty from the
                  wind.
              •   Cover exposed skin with suitable clothing or covers.
              •   If you are in a shelter and have a dry change of clothes,
                  gently replace wet clothes with dry ones. If you are not
                  sheltered, put the dry clothes over the wet clothes.
              •   If you don’t have dry clothes, press as much water out
                  of the wet clothes as possible and wrap the casualty
                  with something windproof.
              •   Insulate the casualty from cold objects—have them sit
                  on a rolled-up jacket or lie on a blanket.
         3.   Give the casualty warm sweet drinks if they are conscious.
         4.   Give ongoing casualty care, get medical help.

   236
                                                Other first aid emergencies




Immersion hypothermia
Immersion hypothermia refers to hypothermia caused by being in
cold water. A person loses heat 25-30 times faster in water than in
air of the same temperature. Immersion hypothermia can happen
very quickly if a person falls into cold water. Suspect hypothermia
whenever someone falls into water by mistake even in the summer.
Immersion hypothermia can also happen more slowly, for instance
while swimming or scuba diving in a lake. In these cases,
hypothermia creeps up on the casualty, and may not be suspected
right away.
Do the following when a hypothermic
casualty is in the water:
    •   Tell the casualty not to take
        off any clothing—clothes
        helps keep heat in.
    •   Tell the casualty to move
        as little as possible—moving
        around causes more heat loss (by                                      7
        convection).
When taking a casualty out of the water, keep them in a horizontal
position, and handle them as gently as possible. Give first aid for
hypothermia to prevent further heat loss, and get medical help.
If you are the casualty, use the “heat escape lessening position”
(HELP) to preserve body heat.

Rewarming a casualty
There are two types of rewarming: passive rewarming and active
rewarming.
Passive rewarming means preventing further heat loss and letting
the casualty’s body rewarm itself; this usually works well for mild and
moderate hypothermia.
Active rewarming means adding heat to the casualty’s body to
warm it up. Active rewarming can cause complications and should
only be done at a hospital—but active rewarming is what a casualty
in severe hypothermia needs. This is why in severe hypothermia, the
first aid is to prevent further heat loss and get medical help.


                                                                       237
    Other first aid emergencies




    In mild hypothermia, you can give the fully conscious casualty
    something warm and sweet to drink. The sweetened drink will
    provide energy to the muscles and help the body to continue
    shivering.




    Don’t give a casualty in moderate hypothermia anything to drink.
    Their muscles for swallowing may not work well and they could
    choke, you should actively rewarm the casualty only if you are far
    from medical aid. Do this by placing the casualty near a heat source
7   and placing containers of warm, but not hot, water in contact with
    the skin (neck, armpits, groin). Prevent further heat loss and get
    medical help as soon as possible.
    Cautions in first aid for hypothermia
          •   Handle the casualty very gently and keep them horizontal if
              possible. Cold affects the electrical impulses that make the
              heartbeat. As a result, the hypothermic casualty’s heart beat
              is very delicate. The heart can stop with rough handling of
              the casualty.
          •   Don’t give the casualty any alcohol, coffee, or other drinks
              with caffeine, or let them smoke —these can increase heat
              loss.
          •   Don’t rub the casualty’s body to improve circulation—this
              will cause cold blood to flow back to the body core and
              cool the body further.

    Frostbite
    Frostbite refers to the freezing of tissues when exposed to
    temperatures below zero. It is a progressive injury with two stages:
    superficial frostbite and deep frostbite.
    238
                                              Other first aid emergencies




Stages of frostbite and their signs and symptoms
    Stage           Description               Signs & symptoms
Superficial   The full thickness of the   •    White, waxy-
frostbite     skin is frozen.                  looking skin
                                          •    Skin is firm to
                                               touch, but tissue
                                               underneath is soft
                                          •    May feel pain at
                                               first, followed by
                                               numbness




Deep          The skin and the tissues    •    White, waxy-
frostbite     underneath the skin              looking skin that
              are frozen, sometimes            turns greyish-
              to the bone. A serious
              condition, often
                                               blue as frostbite
                                               progresses
                                                                            7
              involving an entire hand    •    Skin feels cold and
              or foot.                         hard
                                          •    There is no feeling
                                               in the area




                                                                     239
    Other first aid emergencies




    First aid for superficial frostbite
          1.   Gradually rewarm the frostbitten part with body heat.
               •   Cover frostbitten toes, ears, etc. with warm hands.
               •   Warm up frostbitten fingers by placing them in a warm
                   area of the body like the armpit.
          2.   Take measures to prevent these areas from freezing again—
               either stop the activity or dress more appropriately.

    First aid for deep frostbite
    Deep frostbite needs medical help as soon as possible.
          1.   Prevent further heat loss from the frozen part and the rest
               of the body. Handle the frozen tissue gently to prevent
               tissue damage.
          2.   Get medical help. If the feet or legs are frozen, transport
               using a rescue carry or stretcher if possible.

7         3.   If medical help is not available, you are in a safe, warm
               place and there is no danger of the part refreezing, then
               thaw the frozen part:
               •   Gently remove the clothing from the affected part.
               •   Find a container that is large enough to hold the entire
                   frozen part and fill this with water
                   that feels warm when you put your
                   elbow in it (about 40° C).
               •   Remove any jewellery and put the
                   whole frozen part in the water.
                   Keep adding warm water to keep
                   the water in the container at a
                   constant temperature.
               •   Keep the part in the water until it is
                   pink or does not improve any more—
                   this can take up to 40 minutes, and may be painful.
               •   Gently dry the affected part. Put sterile dressings over
                   wounds and between fingers or toes.
               •   Keep the part elevated and warm. Do not break any
                   blisters that form

    240
                                               Other first aid emergencies




A deeply frostbitten extremity will be very painful as it defrosts.
There will be swelling and perhaps tissue loss. For that reason it is
best done at a medical facility. If the casualty must walk out or be
transported, do not thaw the frozen part—there will be less tissue
damage and pain if the part is left frozen. Make sure the rest of the
body is well protected from the cold and the casualty has plenty of
food and water during the journey to safety.
Cautions in first aid for frostbite
    •   Do not rub the area—the tiny ice crystals in the tissues may
        cause more tissue damage.
    •   Do not rub snow on the area—this may cause further
        freezing and tissue damage from the rubbing.
    •   Do not apply direct heat; this may rewarm the area too
        quickly.

Trench Foot
Trench Foot (immersion foot) is a condition caused by prolonged
exposure to cold, but not freezing temperatures, usually along with          7
wet conditions. Named from the First World War troops who stood
and fought for long periods from waterlogged trenches.
Trench Foot has been identified more recently at events where poor
foot hygiene may be present:
    •   Multi-day music festivals
    •   Long-distance or multi-day races
    •   Hiking in cooler, wet conditions
    •   Prolonged work in cool and wet conditions
Signs and Symptoms of trench foot
    •   Numbness or burning pain
    •   Discoloured skin that turns pale and swelling
    •   Leg cramps
    •   Development of blisters or ulcers after 2 to 7 days
    •   Odour in later stages due to dead tissue (necrosis)



                                                                      241
    Other first aid emergencies




    First Aid for trench foot
    The first aid for trench foot requires medical intervention and
    usually involves debridement of the wounds. Steps to take to
    prevent trench foot from setting in include:
          •   Keep feet dry ‑ change socks and footwear when wet
          •   Keep feet warm ‑ temperatures of 16° Celsius or lower
              increase the risk of trench foot
          •   Wash feet regularly and allow them to air-dry
          •   Avoid sleeping with socks on, particularly if they are wet or
              dirty
          •   Use heat packs to help rewarm cold feet that are showing
              early symptoms

    Frozen state
    When the temperature is below zero, it is possible to discover
    someone who is completely frozen—this is a frozen state.
7   Recognize a frozen state when:
          •   The casualty is found in a cold location and is unresponsive
          •   The joints of the jaw and neck are rigid when you try to
              open the airway
          •   The skin and deeper tissues are cold and cannot be
              depressed
          •   The entire body moves as a solid unit
    If the casualty is in a frozen state, do not attempt first aid for the
    ABCs. Transport the casualty to medical help if this doesn’t pose a
    risk to the rescuers. Otherwise, get yourself to safety and advise the
    police of the location of the frozen person.

    Heat-related injuries
    Prolonged exposure to extreme heat or heavy exertion in a hot
    environment can cause heat illnesses.
    Factors that can contribute heat-related illnesses include the age of
    the casualty, their level of fitness, health condition, medications or
    other drugs, and occupation.


    242
                                                 Other first aid emergencies




Heat cramps
Heat cramps are painful muscle cramps, usually in the legs and
abdomen, caused by losing too much water and electrolytes
through sweating. Heat cramps are usually caused by heavy
exercise or physical work in a hot environment. The casualty will
complain of cramps and show signs of excessive sweating, though
in a dry environment, the casualty may not seem to be sweating
because the sweat evaporates so quickly.

First aid for heat cramps
    1.   Place the casualty at rest in a cool place.
    2.   Give the conscious casualty water or drinks with electrolytes
         and carbohydrates, as much as they want.




                                                                               7



    3.   Gentle massage can provide relief for cramps
    4.   If the cramps don’t go away, get medical help.

Heat exhaustion
Heat exhaustion is more serious than heat cramps. The casualty
has lost a lot of fluids through sweating. Circulation is affected as
the blood flows away from the major organs and pools in the blood
vessels just below the skin.




                                                                        243
    Other first aid emergencies




    Signs and symptoms of heat exhaustion
          •    Excessive sweating and dilated pupils
          •    Casualty may complain of dizziness, blurred vision,
               headache or cramps
          •    Signs of shock, including: cold, clammy skin; weak,
               rapid pulse; rapid, shallow breathing; vomiting and
               unconsciousness
          •    Dry mouth and thirst (signs of dehydration)
          •    Irritability or aggressive behaviour

    First aid for heat exhaustion
    First aid for heat exhaustion combines the first aid for heat cramps
    with the first aid for shock.
          1.   If the casualty is conscious:
               •   Give the conscious casualty water or drinks with
                   electrolytes and carbohydrates; if the casualty vomits,
7                  don’t give anything by mouth and get medical help
                   right away
               •   Place them at rest on their back in a cool place
               •   Remove excessive clothing and loosen tight clothing at
                   the neck and waist
               •   Apply cool wet towels or cold packs to the body core,
                   around the head, and under the arms
          2.   If the casualty is unconscious:
               •   Place them in the recovery position
               •   Get medical help right away
          3.   Give ongoing casualty care until medical help takes over.




    244
                                               Other first aid emergencies




Heatstroke (hyperthermia or sunstroke)
Heatstroke is a life-threatening condition where the body’s
temperature rises far above normal. It is caused by prolonged
exposure in a hot, humid, and perhaps poorly ventilated
environment. In classic heatstroke, the body’s temperature control
mechanism fails; sweating stops and the body temperature rises
rapidly. In exertional heatstroke, the body temperature rises rapidly
due to heavy physical exertion in high humidity and temperature,
even though sweating continues. Elderly people and those in poor
health are more likely to suffer from heatstroke. Without immediate
first aid heatstroke can result in permanent brain damage or death.
Signs and symptoms of heatstroke
    •    Body temperature rapidly rises to 40°C or higher—the
         casualty is hot to the touch
    •    The pulse is rapid and full but gets weaker in later stages
    •    Breathing is noisy
    •    Skin is flushed, hot and dry in classic heatstroke, and
         flushed, hot and sweaty in exertional heatstroke                    7
    •    Casualty is restless and may complain of headache, fatigue,
         dizziness and nausea
    •    Vomiting, convulsions, unconsciousness may occur
You can tell the difference between heat exhaustion and heatstroke
by the condition of the skin. In heat exhaustion, the skin is moist
and cold. In heatstroke, the skin is hot, flushed and may be dry or
wet.

First aid for heatstroke
    1.   Perform a scene survey and a primary survey. Lowering
         body temperature is the most urgent first aid for heatstroke.
         •   Move the casualty to a cool, shaded place.
         •   Cool the casualty—remove outer clothing and immerse
             the casualty in cool water up to the chin—watch them
             closely. If this is not possible:
         •   Cover them with wet sheets and fan the sheets to
             increase cooling. Sponge the casualty with cool water,
         •   Place cold packs in the armpits, neck and groin areas.
                                                                      245
    Other first aid emergencies




          2.   When their body feels cool to touch, cover with a dry sheet.
               Put the conscious casualty into the shock position and the
               unconscious casualty into the recovery position. If their
               temperature begins to rise again, repeat the cooling
               process.




          3.   Give ongoing casualty care until handover to medical help.

    Lightning injuries
7 Electrical storms occur throughout most of Canada. Although the
    chance of being struck by lightning is very low, there are many
    injuries and deaths each year from lightning strikes.
    Give first aid at the scene of a lightning strike as you would any
    other emergency scene, keeping the following in mind:
          •    A person struck by lightning does not hold an electrical
               charge, you can touch the casualty without fear of electric
               shock
          •    The casualty has probably been thrown—suspect a head or
               spinal injury
          •    Lightning does strike the same place twice—assess the risk
               of another strike, and move to a safer location if needed
          •    If more than one person is injured, the principles of
               multiple casualty management are reversed—give first aid
               to unresponsive non-breathing casualties first since the
               casualties still breathing are on the road to recovery
          •    Advise all casualties of a lightning strike to seek medical
               help to ensure a full evaluation of any injuries



    246
                                               Other first aid emergencies




Poisoning
A poison is any substance that can cause illness or death when
absorbed by the body. There are poisonous substances all around
us. Poisonous consumer products have poison symbols on their
labels, but there are many other poisonous substances that
don’t carry warnings. Examples include alcohol, some common
household plants, contaminated food, and medications when not
taken as prescribed. Many substances that are not harmful in small
amounts may be poisonous in large amounts.
Poisons are classified according to how they enter the body:
    •   Swallowed poisons—through the mouth
    •   Inhaled poisons—through the lungs
    •   Absorbed poisons—through the skin and mucous
        membranes
    •   Injected poisons—through a hollow needle or needle-like
        device (e.g. a snake’s fangs)
An important part of the first aid for poisoning is telephoning your         7
local or provincial poison information centre for advice on what
to do. Before calling, the first aider must quickly gather as much
information about the incident as possible. Use the history of the
scene and the signs and symptoms of the casualty to gather the
information you’ll need to answer the questions asked by the
poison information centre.
History of the scene
You need to know four basic facts to give appropriate first aid for
poisoning:
    •   What poison was taken–container labels should identify
        the poison; otherwise, save vomit and give it to medical
        help for analysis. What was taken will often tell you




                                                                      247
    Other first aid emergencies




          •   How the poison entered the body–first aid may differ
              for poisons taken by mouth, absorbed through the skin,
              injected into the blood or breathed into the lungs.
          •   How much poison was taken–estimate the quantity that
              may have been taken based on what you see or are told—
              the number of pills originally in the container, the amount
              of chemical in the bottle, etc. Estimate the size/age of the
              casualty, the smaller the person the more dangerous the
              dosage.
          •   When the poison was taken–the length of time the poison
              has been in the body will help determine the first aid and
              medical care needed
    Signs and symptoms of poisoning
    If the history does not reveal what poison was taken, or by what
    means it was taken, signs and symptoms may be helpful in
    answering these questions. Signs and symptoms depend on the
    method of poisoning, however signs and symptoms common to
7   most poisonings include:
          •   Change in the level of consciousness
          •   Difficulty breathing (usually shallow and rapid)
          •   Change in the heart rate
          •   Burned tissue at the route of entry
          •   Chest pain
    Other signs and symptoms related to the method of poisoning
    include:
          •   Swallowed poisons usually cause nausea, abdominal
              cramps, diarrhea and vomiting. They may discolour the lips,
              cause burns in or around the mouth or leave an odour on
              the breath
          •   Poisons absorbed through the skin may cause a reddening
              of the skin, blisters, swelling and burns
          •   Poisons injected through the skin usually irritate the point
              of entry
          •   Inhaled poisons may cause coughing, chest pain and
              difficulty breathing

    248
                                                 Other first aid emergencies




Note that some poisonous gases (i.e. carbon monoxide) are
colourless and odourless. They are not to be easily detectable.
Exercise extra caution if inhaled poisoning is suspected.
General first aid for poisoning
    1.   Perform a scene survey. Do a primary survey. Gather any
         information about the suspected poison.
    2.   If the casualty is responsive, call the poison information
         centre in your region and follow their advice.
    3.   If the casualty is unresponsive or having a seizure, call for
         medical help.
    4.   If the casualty is unresponsive but breathing, place in the
         recovery position.
    5.   Give ongoing casualty care until medical help takes over.

First aid for swallowed poisons
    1.   If CPR is required, check the area around the mouth for
         poisonous residue and wipe clear. Always use a barrier
         device for added protection.
                                                                               7
    2.   Perform a scene survey and a primary survey.
    3.   Do not dilute a poison that has been swallowed (do not
         give fluids) unless told to do so by the Poison Information
         Centre.
    4.   If the casualty is conscious, wipe poisonous or corrosive
         residue from the casualty’s face and rinse or wipe out the
         mouth.
    5.   Never induce vomiting except on the advice of the Poison
         Information Centre—many poisons will cause more damage
         when vomited.

First aid for inhaled poisons
    1.   Perform a scene survey and a primary survey. Assess
         hazards with particular attention to the possible presence
         of a poisonous gas or vapour. Ensure your safety; it may be
         best to wait for professional rescuers.
    2.   Move the person to fresh air and away from the source of
         the poison.
                                                                         249
    Other first aid emergencies




          3.   If breathing is not present begin CPR. If the poison could
               affect you while giving first aid, use a face mask or shield
               with a one-way valve.
          4.   If the casualty vomits, keep the airway open by clearing
               out the mouth and putting the casualty into the recovery
               position.
          5.   If the casualty goes into convulsions, prevent them from
               injuring themself.
          6.   Give ongoing casualty care. Get medical help.

    First aid for absorbed poisons
    Most poisons absorbed by the skin cause irritation at the place of
    contact, but don’t affect the rest of the body. The irritation, called
    contact dermatitis, includes redness, itching and blisters. Some
    chemicals, however, do affect the rest of the body when absorbed
    by the skin, and these can cause life-threatening emergencies.
          1.   Perform a scene survey and a primary survey.
7         2.   Flush the affected area with large amounts of cool water; if
               the poisonous substance is a powder, brush off excessive
               amounts with a dry cloth before flushing.
          3.   Remove any clothing that has been in contact with
               the poison. Don’t touch the clothing until it has been
               thoroughly washed.
          4.   Wash the affected skin thoroughly with soap and water.
          5.   Give ongoing casualty care until medical help takes over.

    First aid for injected poisons
    Follow the general first aid for poisoning. Injected poisons should
    be contained near the injection site. Delay the circulation of the
    poison throughout the body by placing the casualty at rest and
    keeping the affected limb below heart level.
    If you have been pricked with a needle with possible transmissible
    disease contamination, then the site of the needle-stick injury
    should be vigorously scrubbed with Iodine or similar disinfectant.
    Get medical attention.



    250
                                               Other first aid emergencies




Emergency childbirth and miscarriage
                          Emergency childbirth occurs when a
                          child is born at an unplanned time or at
                          an unplanned place. This may happen
                          when there is a sudden, premature
                          delivery or when the mother cannot get
                          to the hospital for a full-term delivery.
                          An average pregnancy is 40 weeks. If the
                          baby is born before the 37th week, it is
                          considered premature. Miscarriage is the
                          loss of the fetus before the 20th week of
                          pregnancy.

Pregnancy and childbirth
A baby is born in a three-stage process called labour. It can be hard
to tell when labour has started, but it has probably begun when one
of the following happens:
    •   The uterus contracts at regular intervals of ten to twenty
        minutes, with contractions getting increasingly stronger and
                                                                             7
        closer together
    •   Amniotic fluid comes out of the vagina, which means the
        amniotic sac has broken—this may be called the “water
        breaking.” There may be a trickle or a rush of fluid
    •   Blood and mucus come from the vagina—this “bloody
        show” means that the mucus plug that had sealed the
        cervix has come out because the cervix has started to open
Stage 1: Early labour­—opening of the cervix
The first stage of labour, called early labour, can take up to
eighteen hours for a first child, but may be much shorter for the
second or subsequent children. Usually there is enough time to
get the mother to a medical facility. Early labour involves muscular
contractions that may begin as an aching feeling in the lower back.
As contractions get stronger, they feel like cramps in the lower
abdomen. Contractions cause the cervix to open, or dilate. The
cervix has to dilate until the opening is about 10 cm across before
the fetus can be pushed down the birth canal, which is the second
stage of labour.

                                                                      251
    Other first aid emergencies




    Stage 2: Birth of the baby
    The second stage of labour usually takes about one hour. It begins
    when the cervix is fully dilated and the contractions start to push
    the fetus out of the uterus and through the vagina. When the
    baby’s head is close to the vaginal opening, the mother may feel a
    tremendous urge to push the fetus out. Usually, the fetus’ head is
    born first, then one shoulder, then the other shoulder, and then the
    rest of the body is pushed out quite quickly. This second stage of
    labour ends when the baby is born. The baby will still be connected
    to the mother by the umbilical cord attached to the placenta, still in
    the uterus.
    Stage 3: Delivery of the placenta
    The third stage of labour is the delivery of the placenta after the
    baby is born. The uterus gets smaller and pushes the placenta out.
    This stage usually takes ten to twenty minutes. Labour is finished
    when the placenta is delivered.


7 Emergency        childbirth
  Your role as a first aider in emergency childbirth is to help the
    mother deliver the baby, to protect the mother and baby, and to
    save all parts of the placenta and amniotic sac until medical help
    takes over.
    If labour is in the second stage, the baby will be born quite soon.
    Recognize the second stage of labour by:
          •   Longer and stronger contractions, less than two minutes
              apart
          •   The mother’s previous experience—if she says the baby is
              coming, believe her
          •   Bulging of the vaginal opening and seeing the baby’s head
              (called crowning)
          •   The mother is straining and pushing down, and feels like
              she has to have a bowel movement
    If you see these signs, you will probably not have time to get the
    mother to medical help. Call medical help to the scene, if possible,
    and get ready to deliver the baby.



    252
                                              Other first aid emergencies




Emergency delivery
  1.   Locate someone to help you. Get the materials you will
       need to deliver the baby and the placenta.




  2.   During the second stage of labour, when the baby will be
       born very soon, place the mother on her back with knees
       bent and head supported, unless she prefers another
       position. Cover her with sheets so you can easily lift them to       7
       check on the progress of labour.
  3.   When you can see the baby’s head, the mother can push
       with the contractions. Tell her to wait until the contraction
       peaks, then take a deep breath, put her chin on her chest
       and push down as hard and as long as she can, while she is
       holding her breath. She may be able to push like this twice
       for each contraction. Position yourself to watch for the
       baby.




                                                                     253
    Other first aid emergencies




          4.   Usually the head is born first and if it comes out too quickly,
               the baby could be injured. As the head comes out, tell the
               mother to control her pushing. Support the baby as it is
               born, but be careful. A new-born baby has a very slippery
               whitish coating—handle the baby gently, firmly and
               carefully.




          5.   Clear the baby’s airway—all babies have fluid in the nose
7              and throat. Hold the baby with the head lower than the
               body to help drainage.




          6.   Most babies will cry right away. When they do, they become
               pink as they start breathing. If the baby doesn’t start to
               breathe and remains pale and limp, try stimulating him. If
               the baby still doesn’t breathe, start infant CPR.




    254
                                           Other first aid emergencies




7.   Once the baby is breathing, pat them dry with a towel,
     being careful not to remove the slippery coating. Wrap the
     baby in a dry towel or blanket to keep them warm. Check
     the umbilical cord. If the cord is still pulsating, keep the
     baby at the level of the vagina. If the cord has stopped
     pulsating, place the baby on their side in the mother’s arms
     with the head low to assist drainage.
8.   Check the vagina for bleeding. If bleeding from the vagina
     is severe—act quickly. The umbilical cord must be tied
     because the baby’s blood may be bleeding through the
     cord and out of the placenta. Tie the umbilical cord and
     keep the baby at the same level as the vagina.
9.   Wait for the placenta to be delivered. This usually happens
     within twenty minutes of the baby’s birth, but don’t be
     surprised if it takes longer. Gently massaging the mother’s
     lower abdomen will quicken the delivery of the placenta.


                                                                         7




10. There may be some bleeding from the vagina after the
    delivery of the placenta. This is normal, and can usually
    be controlled by firmly massaging the uterus. The uterus
    can be felt as a hard, round mass in the lower abdomen.
    Massaging it every few minutes will help it to contract
    which helps control any bleeding. The baby’s nursing at
    the mother’s breast also helps to contract the uterus. Use
    sanitary pads to absorb any bleeding. Examine the skin
    between the anus and the vagina for lacerations and apply
    pressure with sterile dressings to any bleeding tears of the
    skin.




                                                                  255
    Other first aid emergencies




          11. Give ongoing casualty care to the mother and infant. Keep
              them warm and comfortable and transport them to medical
              help as soon as possible.




    Vaginal bleeding and miscarriage
    Miscarriage is the loss of the fetus before the 20th week of
    pregnancy. Most miscarriages happen because the fetus was
    not developing properly. The medical term for a miscarriage is
    spontaneous abortion.
    Signs and symptoms include:
7         •    Vaginal bleeding that could be severe
          •    Signs of shock
          •    Cramp-like pains in the lower abdomen
          •    Aching in the lower back
          •    Passage of tissue

    First aid for miscarriage
    Your main concern in first aid for miscarriage is the shock caused by
    severe bleeding. The casualty may be very distressed.
          1.   Perform a scene survey and a primary survey. Call for
               medical help.
          2.   Give first aid for shock—place the woman on her back, or
               on her left side.
          3.   Ensure privacy. Reassure her and give her emotional
               support.
          4.   Keep any evidence of tissue and blood loss (bloody sheets,
               clothing, etc.). Send this with the woman to medical help
               for examination by the doctor.
          5.   Give ongoing casualty care.

    256
                                                Other first aid emergencies




Assault
A casualty who has been assaulted may be feeling physically and
emotionally distressed. In the case of sexual assault, there may be
physical injuries along with emotional ones. There is potential for
the casualty to go into severe emotional shock during or shortly
after the attack.
General first aid for assault
    1.   Perform a scene survey including obtaining consent
         and ensuring the scene is safe for the first aider. This is
         potentially an emotional situation and the casualty may be
         feeling vulnerable.
    2.   If you suspect an assault, try hard not to disturb evidence
         by removing, washing, or disposing of clothing.
    3.   Call for medical help, stay with the casualty and offer
         reassurance until medical help arrives.

Alcohol and Drug Considerations
Drugs are defined as any substance that can produce a physical
                                                                              7
or mental effect on the body. They include alcohol, prescription
drugs and illegal substances. The effects of drugs are wide-ranging
and can be unpredictable. Dosages and combinations of drugs
(including alcohol) will affect a casualty’s condition. Be prepared for
behaviour which can change quickly.
First aid for a casualty on drugs or alcohol:
     1. Approach the casualty in a calm, professional, sympathetic
        manner and try to gain their confidence.
     2. Ask about the type and amount of the drug consumed, if
        possible.
     3. If the casualty has convulsions, vomiting or low or no level
        of consciousness, be sure to maintain an open airway and
        assess breathing.
     4. Give ongoing casualty care and get medical help.
     5. If present, check with family members if they have been
        provided a medication to use in case of overdose. If
        available and the first aider is trained, assist with an
        antidote if appropriate.
                                                                       257
    Other first aid emergencies




    Mental Health Awareness
    Consider these factors and how they might affect someone:
          •   Critical incident or traumatic event
          •   Dementia in an older adult (Alzheimer disease, Lewy body
              disease or vascular dementia, neurocognitive disorder)
          •   Mood and psychiatric disorders (depression, anxiety,
              bipolar disorder, schizophrenia)
    The World Health Organization defines health as “a state of
    (complete) physical, mental and social well-being and not merely
    the absence of disease or infirmity” (WHO). Mental health issues
    can be related to the health of a whole person.
    There are symptoms of physical conditions that may mimic the
    symptoms of a mental health issue or crisis such as:
          •   Diabetic emergencies
          •   Drug reactions
7         •   Environmental emergencies (heat and cold injuries)
          •   Head injuries
          •   Infections/fever
          •   Lack of oxygen
          •   Shock
    If you are concerned for a casualty’s well-being, call 911. It is more
    important to focus on getting the appropriate help than trying to
    determine a cause of the emergency.
    The Mental Health Continuum shows the range of mental health.
    Those with mental health illness or mental health problems can
    move through this range, and with self-care, support or treatment,
    they can “get back to green”. The focus is behaviours because
    loved ones or colleagues who are suffering will show certain
    behaviours. They can be directed to resources.
    This is not a tool for diagnosing someone. That is for mental
    health professionals.




    258
                                                 Other first aid emergencies




CARE – Responding to a Mental Health Issue or Crisis
   C – Call for help if the person is at risk of suicide
       •   If you think this is a life-threatening emergency call 911;
           this is a time to take action.
       •   If no risk of suicide, proceed to the next step
   A – Ask & Listen. Ask the casualty how they are feeling and
       listen to the person’s responses. The casualty may try to
       tell you what they need, so listening and really hearing this
       person is important.
   R – Respond with options that may be available to them.
       Important: Provide options NOT ADVICE.
       Example of what a first-aider could say, “There is a mental
       health crisis line that has helped other people, would
       you like to call them together?” Or “Maybe we could call
       someone that you would like to talk to (that you trust or
       that could help) right now?” See the Resources section for
       more information.                                                       7
   E – Encourage support in a variety of ways.
       What the person may be feeling is normal and other people
       have felt this way too. A first aider can tell someone that
       they are not alone and to seek help.

Anxiety or Panic Attack
A panic or anxiety attack is both a mental health as well as a
physical health issue. An anxiety attack has similar signs and
symptoms to a heart attack and a first aider might not be able to
differentiate between them. The anxiety attack can be serious and
if left untreated, can lead to a more serious physical condition.
Therefore it is always recommended to call 911.
Signs and symptoms of an anxiety attack may include some or all
of the following:
   •   Hyperventilating (breathing too quickly)
   •   Chest pain or tightness
   •   Trembling and sweating
   •   Hyperventilation, tingling hands and feet
   •   Nausea or vomiting

                                                                        259
    Other first aid emergencies




    Mental Health Continuum




7




    260
                                                Other first aid emergencies




First aid for a panic attack:
    •   Call 911 immediately.
    •   Sit the casualty down in a comfortable position, preferably
        in a quiet area if possible.
    •   While waiting for medical help, and if the casualty or
        hyperventilating, attempt to control or slowdown the
        casualty’s breathing. Examples that can help someone
        focus on their breathing include:
        •    Ask them to count to 4 while breathing in, and again
             count to 4 while breathing out.
        •    Ask them to breathe in through the nose and out
             through the mouth.
Do not have the casualty breathe into a paper bag. This is not
effective and can make the attack worse.

Occupational Stress Injury
Occupational stress refers to stress related to one’s job. It                 7
can be related to added responsibilities or workload without
corresponding supports, role conflict, and working hour changes. In
more extreme cases, it can be related to harassment, bullying, and
a toxic work environment.
An occupational stress injury occurs when mild stressors have
reached a point to create a crisis.
Signs and Symptoms of Occupational Stress Injury
    •   Disruption in sleep patterns and fatigue
    •   Irritability
    •   Lack of interest in food
    •   Anxiety or panic, particularly relating to work
    •   Lack of interest in work
    •   Increased risk-taking at work
    •   Isolation from co-workers
    •   Aggressive behaviour



                                                                       261
    Other first aid emergencies




    Steps to care for Occupational Stress Injuries
    As with many first aid situations, the best care is prevention. If you
    recognize some of the symptoms listed above, examine ways to
    reduce the occupational stressors in your life.
          •   Make use of available vacation and mental health days
          •   Set aside time each day and each week for personal
              interests (even 15 minutes a day can help)
          •   Talk with family and friends about your struggles at work
          •   Strive to get more sleep, exercise, and eat well
          •   Leave work at work ‑ home is for family and personal time
    If you recognize a co-worker may be suffering from an occupational
    stress injury, employ the steps of C.A.R.E. Engage the resources of
    Human Resources, an Ombudsperson, or governmental agencies if
    needed (i.e. Ministry of Labour).

    Crisis Help and Other Mental Health Resources
7         •   9-1-1 or 2-1-1; Check your local directory if not available in
              your region
          •   Kids Help Phone 1-800-668-6868 (all ages 20 and under)
          •   Mental Health Helpline 1-866-531-2600 or Web Chat
              www. mentalhealthhelpline.ca
          •   www.suicideprevention.ca – This resource has listings for
              Mental Health Crisis and Suicide help by province
          •   Local Employee Assistance Programs
          •   Mental Health First Aid: A 2-day program by the Mental
              Health Commission of Canada.
          •   The Working Mind: A longitudinal program by the Mental
              Health Commission of Canada that focuses on resiliency in
              the workplace.




    262
Other first aid emergencies




                              7




                       263
Chapter 8
                            Basic Life Support
                            (BLS) Resuscitation
                            Skills




• Age categories for
  resuscitation
• Activation of emergency
  medical response system
• Artificial respiration
• Cardiopulmonary
  resuscitation (CPR)
    Basic Life Support Resuscitation Skills




    Chapter 8 Basic Life Support for Healthcare
    Providers
    High quality CPR includes an uninterrupted compression rate of
    100-120 per minute, appropriate compression depth based on the
    age of the casualty and allowing for complete chest recoil after
    each compression.
    It is important to remember that where local protocols (including
    legislation, medical direction and professional/workplace
    requirements) differ from this information, the local protocol
    supersedes information in this chapter.

    Age categories for resuscitation
    The health care provider will respond to casualties based on the
    following categories:
          •   Adult—onset of puberty and older
          •   Child—1 year of age to the onset of puberty (about 12
              to 14 years, as defined by the presence of secondary sex
              characteristics)

8         •   Infant—anyone under the age of 1 year
          •   Neonate/newborn—an infant who has been delivered, and
              in the first hours after birth and until they leave the hospital.
              The health care provider will not need to differentiate this
              group from other infants, unless they are specifically trained
              to provide resuscitative care for that age group.

    Activation of emergency medical
    response system
    Health care providers should be familiar with when and how to
    activate their own internal and/or external Emergency Medical
    Response system. A plan should be in place to allow for an AED
    to arrive on scene with the rescuer, or for an AED to be quickly
    retrieved and easily accessible.




    266
                                        Basic Life Support Resuscitation Skills




Casualties of all age—two rescuers
Anytime two rescuers are present, one rescuer should stay and
begin CPR while the second rescuer will activate the Emergency
Medical Response System and obtain an AED, if one is not already
present.

Adult casualty—lone rescuer
Anyone in cardiac arrest will need CPR, defibrillation and Advanced
Life Support.
The lone rescuer should activate the Emergency Medical Response
System immediately when they encounter a witnessed arrest or an
unwitnessed unresponsive adult casualty.
When a casualty of any age is believed to have suffered an
asphyxial arrest, the lone rescuer should call for help using a mobile
phone. The phone can be put on speaker phone to save time. If
a mobile device is not present, the rescuer should provide two
minutes of CPR before leaving to activate EMS and obtaining the
AED. The objective is to correct the cause of the arrest, the lack of
oxygen, by performing two minutes of CPR first.

Infant and child casualty—lone rescuer                                            8
When the lone rescuer witnesses a child or infant casualty who
suddenly collapses they should immediately activate their
Emergency Medical Response System and obtain and use the AED
right away. In the case of an unwitnessed casualty, if they cannot
activate the Emergency Medical Response System from the scene,
the lone rescuer should provide two minutes of CPR before leaving
to call.
When activating the Emergency Medical Response System, the
rescuer may consider carrying the infant/child if the casualty is small
enough, if injuries permit and if the distance they must go does not
impact on the start or resumption of CPR.




                                                                           267
    Basic Life Support Resuscitation Skills




    Artificial respiration
    Artificial respiration (AR) is a way you can supply air to the lungs of a
    casualty who is breathing ineffectively or not breathing at all but has
    an adequate pulse. Pulse/breathing checks should be performed
    every two minutes for at least 5 seconds but no longer than 10
    seconds.
    The methods for ventilating a non-breathing casualty are:
          •   Mouth-to-mask with supplemental oxygen
          •   Two person bag-valve mask
    Infants and children with a pulse rate of less than 60 beats per
    minute and who show signs of poor perfusion despite oxygen
    and ventilation should receive chest compressions in addition to
    ventilations.
    Artificial respiration can be given in a wide range of situations. In an
    emergency situation, keep the following in mind:
          •   You can start AR right away in any position (but it is best if
              the casualty is on their back on a firm, flat surface)
          •   You can continue AR while the casualty is being moved to
8         •
              safety by other rescuers
              You can give AR for a long time without getting too tired
          •   AR techniques can be used to help a casualty with severe
              breathing difficulties
    Giving AR in some situations may be more difficult than in others.
    Some examples are:
          •   When severe injuries to the mouth and nose prevent a
              good seal around the mouth
          •   When blood and/or other body fluids drain into the throat
              and block the airway, do your best to drain the mouth prior
              to beginning AR
          •   The casualty has been poisoned by a toxic gas-like
              hydrogen sulphide and coming in contact with the casualty
              may result in you being poisoned
          •   The casualty has a corrosive poison on the face or in the
              mouth, and you don’t have a face mask

    268
                                         Basic Life Support Resuscitation Skills




When this happens, you have to do the best you can (based on your
level of training) without putting yourself into danger.

Opening the airway
Health care providers will primarily open a casualty’s airway using
the head-tilt chin-lift, except in cases where a spinal injury is
suspected. In those cases, a jaw thrust is used. In the event that a
spinal injury is suspected and the jaw thrust does not work, use a
head-tilt chin-lift to open the airway.

Using a jaw thrust
    1.   With the head and neck supported, position your hands on
         either side of the head.
    2.   Steady your thumbs on the cheek bones. Grasp the angle
         of the jaw with the middle, ring and little fingers and lift to
         open the airway.
    3.   If necessary, open the mouth using the index fingers.
    4.   Check for signs of breathing and pulse for at least 5 and up
         to 10 seconds while holding the airway open with the jaw
         thrust.
    5.   If there is a pulse, but no breathing, position the mask                  8
         over the casualty’s face. Blow into the casualty’s mouth and
         watch for the chest to rise. Keep lifting the jaw to hold the
         airway open.
    6.   If there is no pulse, begin compressions and continue CPR
         until an AED arrives on scene.




                                                                            269
   Basic Life Support Resuscitation Skills




   Bag-valve mask (BVM)
   A bag-valve mask is a self-inflating bag with a one-way valve that a
   face mask can be attached to. The BVM will also accept an oxygen
   reservoir bag. The bags come in three sizes: adult, child, and infant.
   Using a bag-valve mask
         •   After opening and securing the airway, select the correct
             mask size, based on the size of the casualty (adult, infant, or
             child).
         •   Position your thumbs over the top half of the mask with
             your index and middle fingers over the bottom half
         •   Place the apex of the mask over the bridge of the nose,
             then lower the mask over the mouth and chin. If the mask
             has a large round cuff surrounding a ventilation port, centre
             the port over the mouth
         •   Use your ring and little fingers to bring the jaw up to the
             mask
         •   Instruct a second rescuer to squeeze the bag with two
             hands, providing only enough air to make the chest rise

8 Using advanced airways with masks
   When using a pocket or bag valve mask, using an advanced
   airway is recommended. This involves advanced skill training. If an
   advanced airway is not available or you are not trained on how to
   use it, this does not preclude you from using a pocket mask or BVM.
   Using one or the other without an airway is acceptable. The health
   care professional may be asked to assist with the bag valve mask
   when an advanced responder has inserted an advanced airway.
   Adjunct airways (oral or nasal) may be necessary in conjunction with
   bag-valve mask if the casualty is unresponsive




   270
                                      Basic Life Support Resuscitation Skills




Adult & child artificial respiration Two-rescuer BVM
   1.   One rescuer positions themselves at the casualty’s head,
        and places the mask on the face.
   2.   Using the thumb and first finger of EACH hand around the
        valve in a “C” position they press the mask against the face.
   3.   Using the remaining fingers of EACH hand in an “E”
        position they lift up on the jaw and
   4.   Tilt the head back to open the airway. If the casualty has a
        suspected head/spinal injury, use a jaw thrust.
   5.   The second rescuer will squeeze the bag to ventilate. Give
        each breath in 1 second. Make the chest visibly rise.
        •   Adult rescue breathing: 1 breath every 5-6 sec.
        •   Child rescue breathing: 1 breath every 3-5 sec.
   6.   Check the pulse approximately every 2 minutes.




                                                                                8




                                                                         271
    Basic Life Support Resuscitation Skills




    Infant artificial respiration Two rescuer BVM
          1.   One rescuer positions themselves at the casualty’s head
               and places the mask over the nose and mouth. Do not
               cover the eyes or chin.
          2.   Using the thumb and first finger of EACH hand around the
               valve in a “C” position they press the mask against the face.
          3.   Using the remaining fingers of EACH hand in an “E”
               position they lift up on the jaw and tilt the head back to
               open the airway. If the casualty has a suspected head/spinal
               injury, use a jaw thrust.
          4.   The second rescuer will squeeze the bag to ventilate. Give
               each breath in 1 second. Make the chest visibly rise.




8


          5.   Give 1 breath every 3-5 seconds (12-20 per minute).
          6.   Check the pulse approximately every 2 minutes.




    272
                                       Basic Life Support Resuscitation Skills




Assisted breathing
Assisted breathing helps a casualty with severe breathing difficulties
to breathe more effectively. In a clinical setting you may have access
to a CPAP (continuous positive airway pressure) machine. It is most
useful when the casualty shows very little or no breathing effort. If
breathing effort is good, the casualty will likely breathe better on
their own. Start assisted breathing when you recognize the signs of
severe breathing difficulties.
The technique for assisted breathing is the same as for artificial
respiration except for the timing of the ventilations. If the casualty
is breathing too slowly, give a breath each time the casualty inhales,
plus an extra breath in between the casualty’s own breaths. Give
one breath every five seconds for a total of 12 to 15 breaths per
minute.
If the casualty is breathing too fast, give one breath on every
second inhalation by the casualty. This will hopefully slow down
the casualty’s own breathing. Give a total of 12 to 15 breaths per
minute.
If the casualty is conscious, explain what you are going to do and
why. Reassure the casualty often and encourage them to try to
breathe at a good rate with good depth.                                          8
Artificial respiration to someone who breathes
through the neck
Some people breathe through an opening at the base of the neck.
This opening, called a stoma, is the result of a previous medical
operation called a laryngectomy.
You may not know a person breathes through the neck when you try
to give AR. If the air seems to go down the airway when you blow,
but the chest doesn’t rise, check the neck for a stoma. You may also
hear air coming out of the stoma as you blow.




                                                                          273
    Basic Life Support Resuscitation Skills




    Giving AR to a casualty with a Stoma
    The first aid rescue sequence does not change. Once you recognize
    a person breathes through a stoma, do the following:
          •   Expose the entire neck and remove all coverings over the
              stoma. If there is a tube coming out of the stoma, don’t
              remove it




          •   Put a pad under the shoulders to keep them slightly
              elevated (if you have one close by)
          •   Keep the head in line with the body and keep the chin
              raised
          •   Seal the mouth and nose with the hand closest to the head
8         •   Seal your face shield or your pocket mask over the stoma,
              or connect your BVM to the tracheostomy tube, and
              ventilate
          •   Watch the chest rise (look, listen and feel for air movement)
          •   Let the air escape from the stoma between breaths
          •   Maintain a clean air passage, using a cloth to clean the
              opening; never use paper tissues




    274
                                        Basic Life Support Resuscitation Skills




Gastric distension
If you blow into a casualty too fast or too hard, air may be bypassed
into the stomach causing it to fill with air and become bloated. This
is called gastric distension, and it can make it harder to ventilate the
casualty and increase the chances that the casualty will vomit.
If the stomach becomes distended, try to prevent further distension
by:
    •   Repositioning the head and opening the airway again
    •   Blowing more slowly, with less air
    •   Making sure the airway is held fully open
It is unusual, but the stomach can become so distended that the
lungs cannot expand. In this case, the air you blow won’t go into the
lungs, so you have to relieve the gastric distension by forcing the air
in the stomach out. Only relieve gastric distension when the lungs
cannot expand and AR is ineffective.
To prevent gastric distension
    •   Give breaths at the recommended rate
    •   Only blow enough air to make the chest rise
    •   Make sure the airway is fully open—keep the head tilted                   8
        well back (but not over-extended)




                                                                           275
    Basic Life Support Resuscitation Skills




    Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
    When assessing the casualty, the HCP will check for breathing and a
    pulse simultaneously before beginning compressions.
    Rescuers should check the:
    Adult—carotid pulse
    Child—carotid or femoral pulse
    Infant—brachial or femoral pulse
    Brachycardia (slow pulse rate)
    Any casualty with a pulse rate of less than 60 beats per minute and
    showing signs of poor perfusion/circulation, despite oxygen and
    ventilation, should also receive chest compressions. The low heart
    rate (<60 bpm) does not provide enough circulation to sustain
    adequate cellular oxygenation; by providing a compression rate of
    100 to120 compressions per minute the health care provider will
    assist in providing adequate circulation to a casualty.
    CPR (compression and ventilation) rates
    Health care providers will provide the same compression to
    ventilation rates as the lay rescuer when performing one rescuer
8   CPR for adults, children and infants; as well as two-rescuer adult,
    but the ratio will change when they perform two-rescuer CPR for the
    child and infant.
    For two-rescuer CPR on a child or infant, the rescuer will provide
    compressions and ventilations at a ratio of 15 compressions to
    2 ventilations. Depth of compressions should be at least 1/3
    the depth of the infant or child’s chest with a rate of 100 to 120
    compressions per minute.
    In the case of the infant casualty, the rescuer may encircle the infant
    casualty’s chest and use their thumbs side-by-side or one on top of
    the other to provide compressions. The method used will depend
    on the size of the infant casualty and the rescuer’s thumbs.




    276
                                       Basic Life Support Resuscitation Skills




Adult CPR/AED
Check breathing and pulse for at least 5 and no more than 10
seconds. If there is a pulse, but no breathing, begin artificial
respiration. If there is no pulse and no breathing, or only agonal
breaths, begin compressions.
Agonal breathing is an abnormal pattern of breathing driven by a
brain-stem reflex, characterized by irregular gasping respirations at
times accompanied by strange vocalizations. They can occur with
cardiac arrest and lead bystanders to believe the casualty is
breathing.




                                                                                 8




                                                                          277
    Basic Life Support Resuscitation Skills




    One rescuer 30:2
          1.   Give 30 chest compressions in the middle of the upper
               chest using two hands.
          2.   Push hard, push fast (100 to 120 per min) to a depth of 5-6
               cm (2-2.4 inches). The pressure and release phases take
               the same time. Release pressure and completely remove
               your weight at the top of each compression to allow chest
               to return to the resting position after each compression.
               Minimize interruptions.
          3.   Give 2 breaths.
          4.   Continue 30:2 until:
               •   An AED is ready for use
               •   EMS/advanced providers arrive or
               •   The casualty shows signs of recovery.
    Two or more rescuers 30:2
          1.   Rescuer one—30 chest compressions at a rate of 100 to 120
               per minute.
          2.   Rescuer two—give 2 rescue breaths, enough to make the
8              chest visibly rise. Minimize interruptions.
          3.   Quickly change positions every 5 cycles (2 minutes).
          4.   If an advanced airway is in place—one breath every 6-8
               seconds with no pause in compressions for breaths.




    278
                                     Basic Life Support Resuscitation Skills




Defibrillation
   1.   Expose the chest. Turn on the AED. Follow the voice
        prompts. Select and attach the adult pads.




   2.   SHOCK advised—CLEAR and give 1 shock. Immediately
        resume chest compressions.




                                                                               8

   3.   NO SHOCK advised—immediately resume chest
        compressions.




   4.   Continue 30 compressions—2 breaths for 5 cycles
        (approximately 2 minutes). Analyze heart rhythm, continue
        CPR/AED until advanced providers take over.

                                                                        279
    Basic Life Support Resuscitation Skills




    Child CPR/AED




8
    One rescuer 30:2
          1.   Give 30 chest compressions in the middle of the upper
               chest using one or two hands.
          2.   Push hard, push fast (100 to 120 per min) to a depth of
               about 2 inches (5 cm), or about 1/3 of the depth of the
               chest. The pressure and release phases take the same
               time. Release pressure and completely remove your weight
               at the top of each compression to allow chest to return
               to the resting position after each compression. Minimize
               interruptions
          3.   Give 2 breaths.
          4.   Continue 30 compressions: 2 breaths.




    280
                                      Basic Life Support Resuscitation Skills




Two or more rescuers 15:2
   1.   Rescuer one—15 chest compressions at a rate of at least
        100 to 120 per minute.
   2.   Rescuer two—give 2 rescue breaths, enough to make the
        chest visibly rise.
   3.   Quickly change positions every 10 cycles (2 minutes).
   4.   If an advanced airway is in place—one breath every 6-8
        seconds with no pause in compressions.
Defibrillation




   1.   Expose the chest. Turn on the AED. Follow the voice
        prompts. Select and attach the pediatric pads. If pediatric
                                                                                8
        pads are not available, use adult pads.
   2.   SHOCK advised: CLEAR and give 1 shock. Immediately
        resume chest compressions.
   3.   NO SHOCK advised: Immediately resume chest
        compressions.
   4.   Continue 15 compressions—2 breaths for 5 cycles
        (approximately 2 minutes). Analyze heart rhythm, continue
        CPR/AED until advanced providers take over.




                                                                         281
    Basic Life Support Resuscitation Skills




    Infant CPR/AED
    In the case of the infant casualty, the rescuer may encircle the infant
    casualty’s chest and use their thumbs side-by-side or one on top of
    the other to provide compressions. The method used will depend
    on the size of the infant casualty and the rescuer’s thumbs.
    One rescuer 30:2




8



          1.   Give 30 chest compressions just below the nipple line using
               two fingers.
          2.   Push hard, push fast (100 to 120 per minute) to a depth of
               about 1 1/2 inches (4 cm) or 1/3 of the depth of the chest.
               The pressure and release phases take the same time.
               Release pressure and completely remove your weight at
               the top of each compression to allow chest to return to
               the resting position after each compression. Minimize
               interruptions.
          3.   Give 2 breaths.
          4.   Continue 30 compressions: 2 breaths.
    282
                                       Basic Life Support Resuscitation Skills




Two or more rescuers 15:2
    1.   Rescuer one—15 chest compressions at a rate of at least
         100 to 120 per minute.
    2.   Rescuer two—give 2 rescue breaths, enough to make the
         chest visibly rise.
    3.   Quickly change positions every 10 cycles (2 minutes).
    4.   If an advanced airway is in place—one breath every 6-8
         seconds with no pause in compressions.
Defibrillation
    1.   Expose the chest. Turn on the AED. Follow the voice
         prompts. Select and attach the pediatric pads. If pediatric
         pads are not available, use adult pads.
    2.   SHOCK advised: CLEAR and give 1 shock. Immediately
         resume chest compressions.
    3.   NO SHOCK advised: Immediately resume chest
         compressions.
    4.   Continue 15 compressions—2 breaths for 5 cycles
         (approximately 2 minutes). Analyze heart rhythm, continue
         CPR/AED until advanced providers take over.                             8
Team approach
Health care providers should practice working in integrated teams.
When a team is available, one rescuer provides airway control and
ventilations right away, a second rescuer begins compressions
and a third obtains and uses the AED. This is the optimal situation
as the rescuers have the ability to maximize the compression
fraction of CPR prior to defibrillation. A high performance team can
achieve compression fractions of 80%, i.e. perform effective chest
compression for the majority of the time they are resuscitating the
casualty.




                                                                          283
Appendix A
Appendix A
Quick Reference
                                                                                                                    Unit ID             CALL NUMBER
                  SAMPLE FIRST AID REPORT
     Patient :

     Surname: _______________________________________            Given Names: ______________________ Date of Birth: ___________ Sex: M             F
     Contact Information: ____________________________ _____________________________Telephone: ___________________________________

     ____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
     Details of the Illness/Injury
     Date: _______________________________ and Time: __________________ am/pm Location: _________________________________________

                            Sitting: 
     Patient found: Ambulatory:           Prone:  Supine:  Side: Left  Right
                           Staff:  Co-worker:  Other:  Name: ____________________________________________________
     Patient brought in by: Self:

     LOC: Alert:  Verbal:  Pain:  Unresponsive: 
                                                            Allergies
     Chief Complaint::                                                            Medications
                                                                                  Previous Hx
     Symptoms                                                                     Last Oral Intake
     (OPQRST)                                                                     Events Prior

     Vital Signs Record              Time         Time           Time                                           Assessment
      Blood Pressure
      Pulse                                                                      Abrasion
      Breathing                                                                  Burn
      Skin                                                                       Contusion
     Pupils                                                                      Deformity
      SpO2                                                                       Fracture
      Blood Glucose                                                              Haemorrhage
     Treatment Provided:                                                         Laceration
      Oxygen:                                                                    Pain
                                                                                 Rigidity
                                                                                 Swelling
A                                                                                Tenderness

     Follow Up/Referral - None          Nurse  Doctor  Ambulance  Hospital  Other ____________________________________

     Refusal of Care: I ________________________________ do not wish to receive medical/first aid care from these First Responders. I
     have been advised that I need medical/first aid care and have decided to refuse it. I do not hold the first responders and their parent
     agency responsible for any negative consequences that I may suffer from this refusal.


     Signature of patient: __________________________________________________   Signature of witness: _________________________________________________




     First Aid Attendant (Print):                                               Time:

     Signature:                                                                 Date:

     First Aid Attendant (Print):                                               Time:

     Signature:                                                                 Date:




    286
Quick first aid reference
Send for an ambulance as soon as there is indication of a life-
threatening emergency:
    •    loss of consciousness
    •    breathing emergency (difficult or stopped breathing)
    •    circulatory emergency (severe bleeding, heart attack,
         stroke)

        Signs and symptoms                      First aid
Allergic reaction
Itchy, flushed skin                Position casualty at rest
Sneezing, runny nose               If casualty has medication, help
Swelling of the airway             them to take it
Nausea, vomiting                   Monitor the ABCs
                                   Get medical help


Angina
Denial, sense of impending         Position casualty at rest
doom                               If casualty has medication, help
Heaviness, tightness in chest      them to take it
Indigestion, aching jaw            Monitor the ABCs
Pale skin, sweating                Get medical help
                                                                         A
Asthma
Shortness of breath                Position casualty for comfort
with coughing or wheezing          sitting or semi-sitting
Sitting upright, trying to         Assist with medication
breathe                            Monitor the ABCs
Blue colour to face (cyanosis)     Get medical help
Anxiety, tightness in ches
t




                                                                   287
          Signs and symptoms                         First aid
    Bites and stings
    Pain at site                         Position casualty at rest
    Heat and swelling at site            Remove stinger if appropriate
    Redness, itching                     Clean affected area
    Rash or bumps on skin                Monitor the ABCs


    Bleeding (external)
    Obvious wound                        Apply pressure
    External blood                       Position casualty at
    Cold, clammy skin                    rest
    Restlessness, apprehension           Apply dressings and bandages
    Faintness, dizziness                 Check circulation before and
                                         after bandaging

    Bleeding (internal)
    No obvious wound                     Shock position, if injuries permit
    Blood from ears, nose, in urine/     If thirsty, moisten lips
    stool                                Monitor the ABCs
    Bloodshot or black eye(s)            Get medical help
    Blood coughed up or in
    vomitus
A
    Burns
    Skin red to pearly white or          Position casualty at rest
    charred                              Cool the affected area
    Pain in mild cases, no pain if       Apply dressings and bandages
    severe                               Check circulation
    Blisters
    Moist skin, dry leathery if severe




    288
     Signs and symptoms                        First aid
Choking
Mild obstruction                   Stay with casualty
Able to speak                      Encourage casualty to cough
Signs of distress                  If obstruction not cleared, get
Red face                           medical help
Severe obstruction                 Position yourself supporting the
Not able to speak                  casualty
Weak or no coughing                Give 5 back blows, 5 abdominal
Grey face, blue lips, ears         thrusts
                                   Be prepared for loss of
                                   consciousness


Concussion
Partial or complete loss of        If you suspect head/spinal
consciousness                      injury, do not move
Shallow breathing, nausea          Monitor the ABCs
Pale, sweating, headache           Get medical help


Diabetic emergency
Hypoglycemia (needs sugar)         Position casualty at rest
Sweaty, pale, cold                 Give sugar
                                                                           A
Headache, trembling                Monitor the ABCs
Confusion, irritable, aggressive   If no improvement, get medical
                                   help
Hyperglycemia (needs insulin)      Position casualty at rest
Flushed, dry, warm                 If unsure, whether hyper or
Drowsy, becoming unconscious       hypo, give sugar
Thirsty, breath smells like nail   Monitor the ABCs
polish                             Get medical help




                                                                     289
          Signs and symptoms                     First aid
    Embedded object
    Obvious wound                   Do not remove embedded
    Object visible in wound         object
    Bleeding at wound site          Build up dressings around
                                    object
                                    Apply dressings without
                                    pressure on object
                                    Bandage get medical help


    Emergency childbirth
    Longer and stronger             Position casualty at rest
    contractions                    Keep casualty warm
    Mother tells you the baby is    Place sanitary napkin or clean
    coming                          pad for bleeding
    Straining, bearing down         Get medical help
    Feeling she has to have bowel
    movement


    Fainting
    Pale, sweaty                    Loosen tight clothing, get fresh
A   Dizzy and nauseous              air
    Position casualty at rest       Stay with casualty until fully
    Unsteady, may collapse          recovered


    Frostbite
    White waxy skin                 Get casualty out of cold
    Skin firm but soft underneath   Position casualty
    Skin becomes cold and hard      If frostbite is superficial, rewarm
    Painful at first, then numb     the area
                                    Give first aid for wounds



    290
     Signs and symptoms                      First aid
Head/spinal injury
Confused, lightheaded            Tell casualty not to move
Mechanism of injury to suggest   Monitor the ABCs
Pale, cold, clammy                Get medical help


Heart attack (see Angina)
Denial, sense of impending       If conscious, position casualty
doom                             at rest
Heaviness, tightness in chest    If casualty has medication, help
Indigestion, aching jaw          them to take it
Pale skin, sweating              Monitor the ABCs
Unconsciousness                  Get medical help
Stopped breathing                If unresponsive and not
                                 breathing, get medical help,
                                 and send for AED
                                 Begin CPR


Hypothermia
Shivering gets worse, then       Get casualty out of cold
stops                            Position casualty at rest
Breathing slows, and may stop    Only rewarm a casualty with           A
Confused, sleepy, irrational     mild hypothermia
May lose consciousnes            Get medical help


Heat exhaustion
Excessive sweating, dilated      Get casualty out of heat
pupils                           Give as much to drink as they
Dizziness, blurred vision,       will take Remove excessive
headache, cramps                 clothing
Cold, clammy skin, shallow       Monitor the ABCs
breathing
Possible loss of consciousness
                                                                 291
         Signs and symptoms                      First aid
    Heatstroke
    Body temperature hot to touch    Cool the casualty
    Skin flushed, hot and may be     Remove excess clothing
    wet or dry                       Immersion in cold water
    Restless, headache, dizziness    Get medical help
    Vomiting, convulsions,
    unconsciousness


    Poisoning
    Swallowed                        Position casualty
    nausea, vomiting                 Conscious casualty - call Poison
    discolouration at lips, burns    Control
                                     Unconscious casualty - get
                                     medical help
    Absorbed                         If powder, brush off
    Red skin, blisters, swelling,    Flush area with large amounts
    burns                            of water
    Injected                         Monitor consciousness and
    Irritation at point of entry     breathing
                                     Monitor the ABCs
    Inhaled                          Ensure safety of yourself and
A Trouble breathing, chest pain      others
                                     Get medical help.


    Seizure
    Sudden cry                       Do not interfere during seizure
    Stiffening of body               Protect casualty from injury
    Loss of consciousness, causing    When the seizure has ended,
    casualty to fall                 place the unconscious casualty
    Breathing irregular or stopped   into the recovery position
    Loss of bladder or bowel         Monitor the ABCs
    control                          Get medical help

   292
       Signs and symptoms                     First aid
Stroke
F.A.S.T.                          Position conscious casualty at
Complains of sudden weakness      rest
Symptoms related to affected      Give nothing by mouth
area                              Monitor the ABCs
Dizziness, headache               Get medical help


Unconsciousness
Eyes do not open                  Get medical help
Does not respond to               Give first aid for injuries or
instructions                      illness
Does not respond to touch         Position casualty in recovery
                                  position
                                  Monitor the ABCs

Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Assess responsiveness
If unresponsive, send someone to call for medical help and get an
AED. Check breathing for at least 5 and not more than 10 seconds.
If not breathing:
Begin compressions
                                                                         A
        Adult                  Child                 Infant
   Use two hands         Use one or two          Use two fingers
                             hands




Push hard, push fast
   •    Compress at a rate of 100-120 per minute
   •    Give 30 compressions
                                                                   293
          •    Open airway and give two breaths
          •    Continue CPR at ratio of 30 compressions to two breaths
               until:
               •   medical help arrives
               •   someone else takes over, or
               •   you are to exhausted to continue

    Additional rescue carries
    The most common carries are presented in Chapter 2 in the section
    on Lifting and Carrying. In some cases, these carries may not be
    appropriate. Additional carries are presented here. Always be aware
    of the risk to both the first aider and the casualty, and the increased
    danger if a casualty suddenly loses consciousness.
    Pick-a-back
    This carry is used for a conscious casualty with lower limb injuries,
    provided he can use his arms. The casualty must be able to help
    get into position on your back or be already seated at chair or table
    height.
          1.   Crouch with your back between the casualty’s knees.
          2.   Have the casualty hold on around your neck.
          3.   Support the casualty’s legs and lift. Use your leg muscles to
               stand up, keeping your back straight.
A                               If the casualty is to be carried pick-a-back
                                for a long distance, make a carrying seat.
                                Make a large adjustable loop from a strap
                                or belts. Put your arm through the loop,
                                arranging it behind your neck and down
                                the front of your shoulders. Leave the
                                bottom half of the loop free at the back
                                about the level of your buttocks
                                Pass the casualty’s legs through the
                                bottom of the loop; one on each side.
                                Position the loop under the casualty’s
                                buttocks, adjusting it for a good carrying
                                position and proper weight distribution.
    294
Cradle carry
Use the cradle carry to lift children and lightweight adults.
    1.   Kneel on one knee at the casualty’s side.
    2.   Place the casualty’s arm around your neck as you support
         the back and shoulders.
    3.   Pass your other arm under the knees to grasp the thighs.
    4.   Ensure a solid footing and place the feet apart for good
         balance.
    5.   Lift using your legs, keep your back straight, and your
         abdominal muscles tense.




                                                                          A




                                                                    295
    Fire fighter’s carry
    The fire fighter’s carry is used for casualties who are helpless and are
    not too heavy for the rescuer.
          1.   With the casualty lying face up in front of you, stand with
               your toes against the casualty’s toes. Grasp her wrists and
               pull her upward and forward.
          2.   Maintain a grip on one wrist as you turn and bend to catch
               the casualty’s upper body across your shoulder. The lifting
               manoeuvre is a continuous, smooth motion to bring the
               casualty through a sitting position to an upright position,
               finishing with the casualty draped over your shoulder.
          3.   Adjust the weight across your shoulders, with the casualty’s
               legs straddling your shoulder.
          4.   Pass your arm between the casualty’s legs and grasp her
               wrist. This will stabilize the casualty on your shoulders and
               leave your other hand free.




A




    296
Two-hand seat
A casualty, who is unable to support his upper body, can
be carried by two rescuers, using the two-hand seat.
    1.   The rescuers crouch on either side of the casualty.
    2.   Each rescuer reaches across the casualty’s back to grasp his
         clothing at the waist on the opposite side.
    3.   Each rescuer passes his other hand under the thighs,
         keeping his fingers bent and holding padding to protect
         against the fingernails. Hook the bent fingers together to
         form a rigid seat. Alternatively, the rescuers can hold each
         other’s wrists.
    4.   The rescuers lift with their legs, keeping their backs straight.
         Once in the standing position, the rescuers adjust their
         hands and arms for comfort. When the casualty is securely
         positioned, the bearers step off together, each using the
         inside foot.




                                                                            A




                                                                      297
    Four-hand seat
    A conscious casualty who can use his hands and arms
    can be carried on a four-hand seat by two rescuers.
          1.   Each rescuer grasps his own left wrist with his right hand,
               then grasps the right wrist of the other
               rescuer with his left hand to form a square.
          2.   Tell the casualty to put his arms around the rescuers’
               shoulders and hoist himself up to permit the
               bearers to pass their hands under the buttocks to position
               them under the thighs at a point of balance.
          3.   Instruct the casualty to hold onto the rescuers’ shoulders to
               keep his balance and support his upper body.
          4.   The bearers step off together, each using the inside foot.




A




    298
Using a blanket with a stretcher
A casualty can be wrapped on a stretcher so that a blanket
provides maximum warmth with minimum weight on the casualty. It
will also allow easy access to the casualty’s
wounds if that is necessary during transportation.
   1.   Place a blanket on the stretcher under the casualty with
        diagonally opposite corners at the head and feet.
   2.   Place padding at appropriate places on the blanket to fill
        the natural hollows at the casualty’s neck and back. Centre
        the casualty on the blanket.
   3.   Cover the feet with the bottom corner and bring the corner
        at the head around the neck to the chest. Wrap the legs
        and lower body with one side.
   4.   Tuck in the last corner on the opposite side.




                                                                         A




                                                                   299
Appendix B
Appendix B
The Body and
How it Works
    Introduction to anatomy and physiology
    As a first aider, you don’t need a full knowledge of anatomy and
    physiology. However, you should know the basic structure of the
    human body and how it functions normally. This chapter describes
    the terms used in anatomy so that you can be more precise
    when giving information about a person’s condition. It gives a
    short description of the major organs and functions of the skin,
    musculoskeletal system, nervous system including the eye, digestive
    and urinary, circulatory and respiratory systems.

    Anatomical terms
    These are the words used to describe where things are on the body
    and how they relate to each other.



     Proximal—
     closer           Anterior—toward the front of the body
     to the
     attachment                                  Posterior—toward the back of the
     of arm/leg:                                 body
     e.g., the
     elbow is
     proximal to                                     Superior—part toward the
     the wrist                                       head of the body
      Extension—                                     Flexion—bending a
      straightening                                  joint
      a joint
                                                     Inferior —the part toward the
                                                     feet of the body
B     Distal—further
      away from the
      attachment of                                  Lateral—away from the
      arm/leg: e.g.,                                 midline of body: e.g., the
      the fingers are                                small toe is lateral to the big
      distal to the                                  toe
      wrist



                                            Medial—nearer to midline: e.g., the
                                            big toe is medial to the small toe



    302
The skin
The skin is an important organ of the body. Its primary functions
are to protect the body from environmental hazards and infection,
eliminate waste in the form of sweat, help maintain normal body
temperature and tell the brain of environmental temperature
changes.

Environmental control
A rich supply of nerves in the skin keeps the brain aware of
environmental changes. These nerves are sensitive to heat, cold,
pain and touch, and they transmit these sensations to the brain.
The skin helps the body adjust to its environment and protects it
from extreme temperatures. In cold temperatures, blood vessels
constrict to reduce blood flow near the surface of the skin. This
helps prevent loss of heat from the body core. The fatty layers
under the skin insulate the body to keep in body heat. In hot
temperatures, the blood vessels near the skin surface dilate (get
larger), allowing more blood flow near the skin. This cools the
body by moving heat from the core to the surface, where it either
radiates from the body, or is used to evaporate perspiration, having
a cooling effect.


 Functions of the skin
      •   To protect the body from bacterial invasion
      •   To help control body temperature
      •   To retain body fluids
      •   To help eliminate waste products                             B
          through perspiration
      •   To insulate the body

                    epidermis
                    dermis
                    subcutaneous tissue
                    muscle




                                                                 303
    Musculoskeletal system
    The musculoskeletal system is the framework of the body within
    which organs and body systems function. This framework includes
    bones, muscles, tendons and ligaments. Bones act as levers for
    muscle action; muscles shorten to produce movement; tendons
    attach muscles to bones; ligaments attach bones to bones at the
    joints. The musculoskeletal system protects organs, supports the
    body, and provides for its movement.
    Muscles
    Muscles are made of a special kind of tissue that contracts
    (shortens) when stimulated by nerve impulses. Generally, body
    movement is caused by several muscles working in combination—
    as some are contracting, others are relaxing. The nerves in the
    muscles carry impulses to and from the brain.
    Muscles are classified as either voluntary or involuntary. Voluntary
    muscles are consciously controlled by the person, meaning they can
    be contracted or relaxed as the individual wishes. The muscles that
    move the skeleton are voluntary.
    Involuntary muscles contract and relax rhythmically without any
    conscious effort on the part of the person. The heart, which has its
    own regulating system, is a good example of an involuntary muscle.
    The diaphragm, a large dome-shaped muscle that separates
    the chest and abdominal cavities and is used in breathing, has
    characteristics of both voluntary and involuntary muscles. The
    contraction of this muscle, and thus the rate of breathing, can be
    changed at will for short periods of time.
B




    304
Skeleton
The skeleton, made up of bones, forms the supporting structure
that gives the body its shape. It also protects many of the organs—
for example, the brain is protected by the skull, the heart and lungs
by the ribs, and the spinal cord by the vertebrae.
The joints                                           Bone

The bones allow body                           Ligaments—hold bones
movement by serving as                         together
rigid levers for tendons                       Cartilage—cushions the bone
and muscles. The joints                        ends
are formed where two or                        Lubricating membrane—
more bones come together.                      nourishes and lubricates the
Immovable joints allow no                      joint structure
movement, as in the bones                      Capsule—tough covering over
of the adult skull. Slightly                   the joint
movable joints allow only
limited movement and are found between the vertebrae and
between the pelvis and the spine. Freely moving joints are covered
with smooth cartilage to minimize friction, and are held together
by bands of strong tissue called ligaments.
Spine
The spine is divided into five parts
as shown in the diagram. There         Parts of the spine
are 33 bones in the spine, called
                                       Cervical
vertebrae. The vertebrae stack on      7 vertebrae
top of each other with discs between
them. The discs are made of a tough Thoracic
flexible material and serve as shock
                                       12 vertebrae                            B
absorbers in the spine. All the discs Lumbar
                                       5 vertebrae
and vertebrae have an opening in
the centre such that, when they stack Sacral
together, there is a long channel that 5 fused
                                       vertebrae
runs from the top to the bottom of
the spine. The spinal cord, which      Coccygeal
carries all nerve impulses to and from 4 fused
the brain, runs through this channel. vertebrae form
                                       the tailbone
The spine protects the spinal cord,
but if the spine is fractured, broken
                                                                         305
    bones, displaced tissue and swelling can damage the spinal cord,
    possibly causing lifelong disability.
    Thorax
    The thorax is made up of the ribs, the 12 thoracic vertebrae and
    the sternum (breastbone). The thorax protects the organs in the
                 Ribs —12 pairs are attached to
               the vertebrae in back and either
               to the sternum, or to each other,
              in front. The lowest ribs attach to
             the vertebrae only, and are called
                                 “floating ribs”

             Sternum—a dagger-shaped bone
                    with the point downward

           Xiphoid process (tip of sternum)—a
          strong piece of cartilage. Pressure on
          this cartilage can damage underlying
                                          organs


    chest, mainly the heart and lungs. It also provides some protection
    for the upper abdominal organs, including the liver at the front and
    the kidneys at the back. Injuries to the bones of the thorax threaten
    the organs they protect, and can therefore be life-threatening.
    Skull
    All the bones of the head make up the skull. The skull gives the
    head its shape and also protects the brain. When the skull is
    fractured, the brain may also be injured.
                          cranium—the plate-like
B                      bones fuse together during
                         childhood to form a rigid
                                case for the brain

                              facial bones join with
                           bones of the cranium to
                             form the eye and nose
                          cavities which protect the
                                      eyes and nose

                                upper jaw (maxilla)
                              lower jaw (mandible)



    306
                            Main bones of the skeleton



                                                           cranium


                                                mandible


                            clavicle (collarbone)
                                                               ribs
                     scapula (shoulder blade)
                                                                 humerus

                          humerus (upper arm)
                                                                      sternum

                                                                         xiphoid process

                                   spine
                                                                        ulna (little finger side)

                            pelvic bone                                   radius (thumb side)

                             sacrum
                                                                                 metacarpals (bones in the palm)



                                                                                phalanges (bones of fingers)
d the
                                           femur
he
pelvic
 of
                                  patella (kneecap)



                                                           fibula (little toe side)

                                                               tibia (shin bone)
                                                                                                                     B
         tarsals (ankle bones and part of the foot arch)   metatarsals (bones of the foot)

                          phalanges (bones of the toes)




                                                                                                               307
    Nervous system
    The nervous system is composed of the brain, spinal cord and
    nerves. The brain and spinal cord together are called the central
    nervous system. The nerves that spread out to all parts of the body
    are called peripheral nerves. The nervous system is sub divided
    into the voluntary nervous system and the autonomic nervous
    system. The voluntary nervous system controls functions at the will
    of the individual. The autonomic nervous system controls functions
    without the conscious effort of the individual—e.g. heartbeat,
    breathing, blood pressure, digestion and glandular secretions such
    as hormones.
    The peripheral nerves that extend from the spinal cord to all parts of
    the body are of two kinds—motor nerves and sensory nerves. Motor
    nerves control movement. Sensory nerves transmit sensations of
    touch, taste, heat, cold and pain to the brain.
    Brain
    The brain, the controlling organ of the body, occupies almost all the
    space in the cranium. It is the centre of consciousness, memory and
    thought. It receives information and transmits impulses to all parts
    of the body for voluntary and involuntary activities.
    Eyes
    The eye is the organ of sight. Any injury to the eye is potentially
    serious and may result in impaired vision or blindness. The quick
    response of the first aider and the correct first aid may help prevent
    permanent damage to the eye.

B




    308
Eyelid—movable layers of skin that             Pupil—opening that lets light
provide a protective covering for              into the eye
the eye
                                               Conjunctiva—smooth,
Iris—coloured set of muscles which             transparent membrane
control the size of the pupil, which           covering the front of the eye
in turn controls the amount of light           and inner eyelids
entering the eye


                                                    Muscles—used to control
                                                    eye movement
Cornea—thin, transparent
front of the eyeball that                           Optic nerve—transmits
allows light to enter the eye                       nerve impulses to the brain
                                                    for visual interpretation
Aqueous humour—the
watery                                              Retina—light-sensitive layer
fluid filling the space                             covering the back of the
between the cornea and                              inside of the eye. It changes
the iris                                            the light images into nerve
                                                    impulses
Lens—changes shape to
focus light rays upon the                           Vitreous humour —the
retina                                              clear, jelly-like fluid filling the
                                                    cavity behind the lens




Digestive and urinary systems
The digestive and urinary systems convert food and drink into
nutrients for the cells and collect and dispose of solid and fluid
waste. The organs of these systems are classified as hollow or solid.
The hollow, tubular organs carry digestive and urinary materials.
The solid organs are tissue masses with a rich blood supply.
Injury to hollow organs may allow the contents to spill out into the
                                                                                          B
abdominal or pelvic cavities, causing infection. Injury to the solid
organs can result in severe internal bleeding.




                                                                                 309
       Digestive system




                                             Stomach—digests and
                                                stores food until it is
                                            ready to move on to the
       Liver—contains many blood                            intestine
       vessels—a very important
       organ for production of plasma
       (blood) , energy and bile (for fat
       digestion)


                                                                                  Pancreas—
                                                                          produces digestive
                                                                           juices, and makes
                                                                               insulin to help
                                                                                control blood
                                                                                  sugar levels
                                                                             (located behind
      Intestines—a tube
                                                                                 the stomach)
          made up of the
          small and large
           intestines that
     functions to absorb                                                     Gall bladder—
           nutrients from                                                         stores and
        digestion, and to                                                       releases bile
     collect solid wastes                                                    (located under
             for excretion                                                          the liver)

          Small intestine

          Large intestine                                                    Rectum (exit for
                                                                                    wastes)
B




    310
Urinary system
The urinary system removes and collects waste
products from the blood and eliminates them from the
body in the form of urine. It is made up of the kidneys,
ureters, bladder and urethra.


Kidneys—huge quantities
of blood pass through the
kidneys which extract waste
products and produce about                              Bladder—a sac
2500 mL of urine daily. They                            which receives
are partially protected by the                          and holds urine
lower ribs in the back                                  until it is excreted
Ureters—tubes that carries                              Urethra—tube
urine to the bladder from the                           through which
kidneys                                                 urine is excreted
                                                        to the outside




Circulatory system
The circulatory system is a complex closed
circuit consisting of the heart and blood
vessels that circulates blood throughout the
body. Blood circulation
is essential for distributing oxygen and
nutrients to cells, and for collecting waste
products from cells for excretion from the
body.
                                                                                     B
Heart
The heart is a hollow, muscular organ about
the size of a fist. It is located in the chest cavity
behind the sternum. The heart functions as
a two-sided pump, continuously pumping
blood to the lungs and throughout the body. It
pumps by first
relaxing and filling up with blood, then
contracting to squeeze or pump the blood out
                                                                               311
                                                                   Aorta—largest artery that
          Superior vena cava—large                                 carries blood to the body
          vein that carries blood from the
          upper body back to the heart                                             Pulmonary
                                                                               artery—carries
                                                                                  blood to the
  Lungs—a pair
                                                                                         lungs
  of organs which
  oxygenate the
                                                                                Left atrium—
  blood; the heart
                                                                                  collects the
  then pumps it to
                                                                            oxygenated blood
  the body
                                                                                          from
                                                                                     the lungs
  Right atrium—
  collects the
  deoxygenated blood
  from the body

  Right ventricle—pumps                                                     Pulmonary
  the blood to the lungs for Inferior vena                                  veins—carry
                                                 Left ventricle—pumps       blood from the
  oxygenation                cava—large vein     blood to the body          lungs to the heart
                            that carries blood
                            from the lower
                            body back to the
                            heart



  into the blood vessels. To make the heart beat effectively, it has a
  complex system of nerves. These nerves carry electrical impulses
  that control the beating of the heart.

B Blood vessels
  The blood travels through blood vessels. There are three main types
  of blood vessels: arteries, capillaries and veins. The arteries are the
  strongest blood vessels. They carry blood, under pressure, from the
  heart to all parts of the body. The arteries expand according to the
  volume of blood being forced through them by the pumping action
  of the heart, and return to normal size as the heart refills for the next
  contraction. This pressure wave can be felt as a pulse.
  The largest artery, the aorta, emerges from the top of the heart.
  The coronary arteries branch off from the top of the aorta to supply
  the heart with blood. The smallest arteries are called arterioles and
  eventually form capillaries.
  312
Capillaries are the tiny blood vessels that reach every living cell
to deliver oxygen, food, etc. and collect waste products. They
have very thin walls to allow for the exchange of fluids and gases.
Capillaries eventually join to form tiny venules, which in turn form
veins. The veins take the blood back to the heart. Veins have
thinner walls than arteries and most have cuplike valves that allow
blood to flow only toward the heart.
Blood
Blood is the fluid that circulates through the heart and blood
vessels. It transports oxygen and nutrients to the cells and carries
away carbon dioxide and other waste products. Blood is composed
of plasma, red cells, white cells and platelets—see sidebar.
Blood circulation
The blood circulation system is a closed loop beginning and ending
at the heart. It consists of:
Pulmonary circulation—starting at the right side of the heart,
blood is pumped to the lungs, where it drops off carbon dioxide
and picks up oxygen, and then moves it back to the left side of the
heart
Systemic circulation—starting at the left side of the heart, blood is
pumped to the body, where it delivers oxygen and picks up carbon
dioxide, and then moves it back to the right side of the heart
Blood components
    •   Plasma—pale yellow liquid that carries cells, platelets,
        nutrients and hormones
    •   Red blood cells—carry oxygen                                     B
    •   White blood cells—protect the body against microbes
    •   Platelets—help form blood clots to stop bleeding
Blood pressure
Blood pressure is the pressure of the blood pushing against the
inside walls of the blood vessels. With each heartbeat, there is a
wave of pressure that travels throughout the circulatory system.
The pressure wave is strong enough to be felt as a pulse at various
points in the body, including
the wrist (radial pulse), the neck (carotid pulse), and the upper arm
                                                                   313
    (brachial pulse). Three factors control blood pressure:
          •   Blood volume (how much blood is in the body)
          •   The capacity and elasticity of the blood vessels
          •   The strength of the heartbeat
    If blood pressure is too low, the body’s tissues don’t get enough
    oxygen. This results in shock. Severe bleeding reduces the
    blood volume, which affects blood pressure. The body tries to
    compensate for blood loss by constricting the blood vessels and
    reducing the capacity of the circulatory system. With continued
    blood loss, however, the body
    cannot compensate and blood pressure drops.




B




    314
Respiratory system
The respiratory system causes air to be drawn in and out of the
lungs. The fresh air we breathe contains about 21% oxygen. In the
lungs, blood picks up some of the oxygen and releases carbon
dioxide. The air we breathe out has less oxygen (about 16%) and
more carbon dioxide.
The respiratory system has three main parts: the airway, the lungs
and the diaphragm. The airway is the passage which air follows
to get from the nose and mouth to the lungs. In the lungs, blood
drops off carbon dioxide and picks up oxygen. This process is
called gas exchange. The diaphragm, a smooth, flat muscle just
below the lungs, is used in breathing.

Respiratory control
Breathing is controlled by the respiratory centre in the brain,


                                                                       Pharynx*—top of the throat/
                               Trachea*                                 back of the mouth and nasal
                                                                        cavity
                               Bronchi*
                                                                          Nose*
       Lungs—made up of
      thousands of air                                                  Mouth*
  sacs surrounded
  by a network of                                                            Larynx*—contains the
  capillaries, and                                                            vocal chords. The top
the various sizes                                                             is protected by a flap
     of air tubes                                                              called the epiglottis
                                                                               that stays open for
Bronchiole*—the                                                                breathing, but closes
  air tubes leading
        to the air sacs
                                                                              when food and fluids
                                                                              are being swallowed
                                                                                                          B
Alveoli—air sacs where gas exchange                                             Diaphragm—strong
occurs—the walls of the alveoli are thin   * Part of the airway                muscle that separates
   so oxygen and carbon dioxide can be                            the chest from the abdominal
              exchanged with the blood                            cavity—it is dome-shaped when
                                                                  relaxed, as air is being exhaled, and
                                                                  flat when contracted, as air is being
                                                                  inhaled




                                                                                                   315
    located near the base of the neck. It monitors the amount of
    oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood. As the levels of oxygen
    and carbon dioxide change, the respiratory centre responds by
    changing the rate and depth of breathing.
    How much oxygen is used, and how much carbon dioxide is given
    off, is related to the level of physical activity of the person. As
    physical activity goes up, more oxygen is used and more carbon
    dioxide is given off, so the respiratory centre increases the rate and
    depth of breathing to compensate (the heart rate also goes up).
    Breathing slows down when less oxygen is needed and less carbon
    dioxide is being produced.

    Mechanism of breathing
    The lungs have no way of drawing air into themselves. Instead,
    the diaphragm and the muscles between the ribs work together
    to expand the chest, which in turn expands the lungs. This causes
    air to be pulled into the lungs. As the breathing muscles relax, the
    chest returns to its smaller size and air is forced out of the lungs.
    The lungs are covered with a smooth, slippery tissue called the
    pleural membrane. It is a continuous, double-layered tissue, one
    layer attached to the lungs and the other to the inside of the chest
    wall. The pleura acts as a lubricating layer to allow easy movement
    between the chest wall and the lungs, and to ensure that the lungs
    expand with the action of the chest wall.




B




    316
      B




317
    Glossary                                    Anatomy: the structure of the body.
                                                Angina (pectoris): a spasmodic pain in
    A                                           the chest due to a lack of blood supply
     Abandonment: a first aider leaves the      to the heart.
     casualty without consent and without
     the care of a responsible person.          Aorta: the largest artery in the body;
                                                originates at the left ventricle.
     Abdominal thrust: the Heimlich
     manoeuvre; the manual thrusts to create    Aqueous humour: the watery fluid
     pressure to expel an airway obstruction.   produced in the eye and located
                                                between the lens and the cornea.
     ABCs: Acronym meaning A= airway; B =
     breathing; C= circulation.                 Arteries: blood vessels that carry blood
                                                away from the heart.
     Abortion: the premature expulsion
     from the uterus of the products of         Arteriosclerosis: a name for several
     conception.                                conditions that cause the walls of the
                                                arteries to become thick, hard and
     Abrasion: a scraped or scratched skin      inelastic.
     wound.
                                                ASA: acetylsalicylic acid—a medication
     Acute: a condition that comes on           available without prescription used to
     quickly, has severe symptoms and lasts     relieve pain, reduce swelling, reduce
     a relatively short time.                   fever, etc.
     Adam’s apple: the bump on the front        Asthma: attacks of difficult breathing
     surface of the neck formed by part of      with wheezing/coughing, often due to
     the larynx (voice-box).                    allergens.
     AED: automated external defibrillator- a   Atherosclerosis: a form of
     device used to deliver a shock to help     arteriosclerosis caused by fat deposits in
     restart a stopped heart.                   the arterial walls.
     AIDS.: Acquired immunodeficiency           Aura: a sensation of an impending
     syndrome; a fatal disease                  seizure; may be a smell, taste, etc.
     spread through the HIV (human
     immunodeficiency virus).                   Autonomic nervous system: part
                                                of the nervous system that regulates
     Airway: the route for air in and out of    involuntary functions (not controlled
     the lungs.                                 by conscious thought) , such as
     Allergens: substances which trigger an     pulse, breathing, digestion, hormone
     allergic reaction in the body.             secretion, etc.

     Allergic reaction: a hypersensitive        Avulsion: an injury where a piece of
                                                tissue is partially or completely torn
G    response of the body’s immune system
     to a particular allergen                   away.

     Alveoli: air sacs of the lungs.            B
     Amniotic sac: a sac holding fluid          Back blows: sharp blows to the back,
     surrounding a fetus in the uterus.         done to relieve an airway obstruction.

     Amputation: complete removal of an         Bacteria: germs which can cause
     appendage (leg, arm, finger, etc.).        disease.

     Anaphylaxis: serious, potentially life-    Bandage: material which holds a
     threatening allergic reaction.             dressing in place.


    318
Basic life support (BLS): maintaining         Cardiac arrest: the sudden stopping
the ABCs without equipment (excluding         of cardiac function with no pulse, and
barrier devices)                              unresponsiveness.
Blood clot: a semi-solid mass of blood        Carotid artery: the main artery of the
products used by the body to stop             neck; used to assess the carotid pulse.
bleeding.
                                              Carpals: small bones of the wrist.
Blood pressure: the pressure of blood
                                              Cartilage: a tough, elastic tissue
against the walls of arterial blood
                                              covering the surfaces where bones
vessels.
                                              meet, also forms part of the nose, and
Blood volume: the total amount of             ears.
blood in the heart and the blood
                                              Central nervous system: part of the
vessels.
                                              nervous system consisting of the brain
Bloody show: the mucous and bloody            and the spinal cord.
discharge signalling the beginning of
                                              Cerebrovascular accident (CVA):
labour.
                                              stroke; sudden stopping of circulation to
Brachial pulse: pulse felt on the inner       a part of the brain.
upper arm, normally taken on infants.
                                              Cervical collar: a device used to
Breech birth: the delivery of a baby’s        immobilize and support the neck.
buttocks or a foot first, instead of the
                                              Cervix: the lowest portion, or neck, of
head.
                                              the uterus.
Bronchi: the main branches of the
                                              Chest thrusts: a series of manual
trachea carrying air into the lungs.
                                              thrusts to the chest to relieve an airway
Smaller branches called bronchioles.
                                              obstruction.
Bronchospasm: severe tightening of the
                                              Cholesterol: a fatty substance found in
bronchi/bronchioles.
                                              animal tissue or products; also produced
Bruise: broken blood vessels under the        by the body; thought to contribute to
skin.                                         arteriosclerosis.
                                              Chronic: a condition with a long and/or
C                                             frequent occurrence.
Capillaries: very small blood vessels
that link the arteries and the veins; allow   Chronic obstructive pulmonary
gases and nutrients to move into and          disease (COPD): a term describing
out of the tissues.                           a group of lung diseases that cause
                                              obstructive problems in the airways:
Carbon dioxide (CO2): a waste gas             usually consists of chronic bronchitis,
produced by the cells; an important           emphysema.
stimulant for control of breathing.
                                              Circulatory system: the heart and               G
Carbon monoxide (CO): a dangerous,            blood vessels.
colourless, odourless gas which
displaces the carrying of oxygen by the       Clavicles: the collarbones.
red blood cells.                              Clonic phase: describes a convulsion
Cardiovascular disease: refers to             where tightness and relaxation follow
disorders of the heart and blood              one another.
vessels; e.g. high blood pressure and         Closed wound: wound where the skin
arteriosclerosis.                             is intact.


                                                                                        319
     Compression: is a condition of excess       Dermis: the inner layer of the skin
     pressure on some part of the brain,         containing hair germinating cells, sweat
     usually caused by a buildup of fluids       glands, nerves and blood vessels.
     inside the skull.
                                                 Diabetes: a disease caused by
     Concussion: a temporary disturbance of      insufficient insulin in the blood; causes
     brain function usually caused by a blow     excessive blood sugar.
     to the head or neck.
                                                 Diaphragm: a large dome-shaped
     Congestive heart failure: failure of the    muscle separating the chest and
     heart to pump effectively, causing a        abdominal cavities.
     back-up of fluid in the lungs and body
                                                 Diarrhea: excessive watery bowel
     tissues.
                                                 movements.
     Conjunctiva: the transparent membrane
                                                 Direct pressure: force applied directly
     covering the front of the eyeball
                                                 on a wound to help stop bleeding.
     (cornea) and the inner eyelids.
                                                 Dislocation: when the bone surfaces at
     Contamination: contact with dirt,
                                                 a joint are no longer in proper contact.
     microbes , etc.
                                                 Distal: refers to a part that is farther
     Contract: to shorten; usually refers to
                                                 away from the attachment of a leg/arm/
     a muscle which exerts a pull when it
                                                 finger/toe.
     shortens.
                                                 Dressing: a covering over a wound,
     Convection: the loss of heat caused by
                                                 used to stop bleeding and prevent
     the movement of air over the body.
                                                 contamination of the wound.
     COPD: Chronic obstructive pulmonary
     disease (see above).                        E
                                                 Embedded object: an object stuck
     Cornea: the transparent front part of the
                                                 onto the surface (usually on the eye) or
     eyeball.
                                                 impaled into tissues.
     Coronary artery: vessel which feeds
                                                 Embolus: any foreign matter such as
     the heart muscle.
                                                 a blood clot, fat clump or air bubble
     Cranium: the part of the skull covering     carried in the blood stream.
     the brain.
                                                 Emetic: a substance used to cause
     Crepitus: the grating noise made when       vomiting.
     fractured bone ends rub together.
                                                 EMS.: Emergency medical services
     Croup: a group of viral infections that     system—a community’s group of
     cause swelling of the inner throat.         services which respond to emergencies
                                                 including police, fire fighters,
     Cyanosis: a bluish or grey colour of the
G skin due to insufficient oxygen in the
  blood.
                                                 paramedics.
                                                 Emphysema: a chronic lung disease
                                                 characterized by overstretched alveolar
    D                                            walls. See COPD.
     Decapitation: the traumatic removal of
                                                 Epidermis: The outermost layer of the
     the head.
                                                 skin.
     Defibrillation: applying an electrical
                                                 Epiglottis: a lid-like piece of tissue
     shock to a fibrillating heart.
                                                 which protects the entrance to the
     Deoxygenated blood: blood                   larynx (voice-box).
     containing a low level of oxygen.

    320
Epiglottitis: an infection usually in       dressings.
children resulting in a swelling of
                                            Guarding: a tightening of the
the epiglottis —may cause an airway
                                            abdominal muscles when the casualty
obstruction.
                                            has abdominal pain and is touched
Epilepsy: a chronic brain disorder          there.
characterized by recurrent convulsions.
ESM.: Emergency scene management—
                                            H
                                            Head-tilt chin-lift manoeuvre: opening
the sequence of actions a first aider
                                            the casualty’s airway by tilting the head
should follow to give safe and
                                            backward and lifting the chin forward.
appropriate first aid.
                                            Heart attack: the damaging or death of
Exhalation: expiration; breathing out.
                                            an area of the heart muscle caused by
Extrication: freeing from being trapped     loss of blood supply.
(usually a car collision).
                                            Heart failure: a weakened heart muscle
                                            that is unable to push blood forward
F
Femur: the thigh bone.                      Heat cramps: painful muscle spasms
                                            due to excessive loss of fluid and salts
Fibrillation: uncoordinated contractions
                                            by sweating.
of the heart muscle, so that the blood
out-flow is almost nil.                     Heat exhaustion: excessive sweating
                                            causing a loss of water and salts.
Fibula: the bone of the lower leg on the
little toe side.                            Heat stroke: a life-threatening
                                            emergency where the temperature
Flail chest: a condition in which several
                                            regulation mechanism cannot cool the
ribs are broken in at least two places,
                                            body and the temperature is far above
allowing a free-floating segment.
                                            normal.
Flexion: bending a joint.
                                            Heimlich manoeuvre: abdominal thrusts
First aid: the help given to an injured     done to remove an airway obstruction.
or suddenly ill person using readily
                                            History: information about the casualty’s
available materials.
                                            problem: symptoms, events leading up
First aider: someone who takes charge       to the problem, applicable illnesses or
of an emergency scene and gives first       medications, etc.
aid.
                                            Hyperglycemia: abnormally elevated
Fracture: a broken or cracked bone.         blood sugar.
Frostbite: tissue damage due to             Hypertension: high blood pressure.
exposure to cold.
                                            Hyperthermia: too high body
G                                           temperature.                                 G
Gallbladder: a sac under the liver that     Hyperventilation: too deep and rapid
concentrates and stores bile; used for      respirations.
fat digestion.
                                            Hypoglycemia: too low blood sugar
Gastric distention: a swelling of           levels.
the stomach usually with air, due to
                                            Hypothermia: too low body
ventilating with excessive volume or
                                            temperature.
force during artificial respiration .
                                            Hypoxia: too low levels of oxygen in the
Gauze: an open mesh material used for
                                            body tissues.

                                                                                   321
   I                                                Labour: the muscular contractions of
       Impaled object: an object which              the uterus which expel the fetus.
       remains embedded in a wound.                 Laceration: a jagged wound from a rip
       Immobilization: placing some type of         or a tear.
       restraint along a body part to prevent       Laryngectomy: removal of the larynx
       movement.                                    (voice-box); results in a neck-breather.
       Incontinence: loss of bladder and bowel      Lens: a part of the eye which focuses
       control.                                     light rays on the retina.
       Infarction: an area of tissue death due      Ligament: a tough cord of tissue which
       to lack of blood flow.                       connects bone to bone.
       Infection: inflammation due to               Lipoproteins: substances floating in the
       microbes.                                    blood; made of proteins and fats.
       Inflammation: a tissue reaction to           Lymph: a fluid similar to plasma that
       irritation, illness or injury; shows as      circulates in the lymphatic system.
       redness, heat, swelling, and pain.
                                                    Lymphatic system: a system of vessels,
       Inhalation: breathing in; inspiration.       nodes and organs which collects strayed
       Insulin: hormone produced by the             proteins leaked from blood vessels and
       pancreas; important in the regulation of     cleanses the body of microbes and
       blood sugar levels.                          other foreign matter.

       Insulin coma/reaction/shock:                 M
       hypoglycemia (too low blood sugar            Mandible: the bone of the lower jaw.
       levels) due to excessive insulin.
                                                    Mechanism of injury: the force that
       Intra-pleural space: a tiny space            causes an injury and the way it is applied
       containing a negative pressure (vacuum)      to the body.
       between the two pleural layers.
                                                    Medical alert: a means of identifying
       Involuntary muscle: muscles not under        casualties (usually a bracelet, necklace)
       conscious control; heart, intestines etc.    who have a condition that may alter first
       Iris: coloured part of the eye; made of      aid treatment.
       muscles which control light entering the     Medical help: the treatment given by
       eye.                                         or under the supervision of a medical
       Ischemic: lacking sufficient oxygen; as in   doctor.
       ischemic heart disease.                      Mental Health Continuum: The Mental
                                                    Health Continuum shows the range
   J                                                of mental health. Those with mental
G Joint:
  meet.
         a place where two or more bones            health illness or mental health problems
                                                    can move through this range of healthy,
       Joint capsule: a tough covering over a       reacting, injured and ill.
       joint.                                       Mental Health Problem: A mental
                                                    health problem is a broad term that
   K                                                includes both mental disorders and
       Kidneys: a pair of organs which filter       symptoms of mental disorders which
       blood and produce urine.                     may not be severe enough to warrant a
                                                    diagnosis of a mental disorder.
   L
                                                    Metacarpals: bones of the palm of the

   322
hand.                                               air passageway to the lungs.
Metatarsals: bones of the arch of the               Oxygen: an odourless, colourless gas
foot; between the ankle and toes.                   essential to life.
Micro-organisms: germs which can
cause illness.
                                                    P
                                                    Pancreas: an organ located under the
Miscarriage: the lay term for an                    stomach; produces digestive enzymes
abortion; the loss of the products of               and hormones which regulate blood
conception.                                         sugar.
Mouth-to-mouth ventilation: artificial              Paralysis: the loss of muscle function in part of
respiration by blowing air into the                 the body.
mouth of the casualty.
                                                    Patella: the bone of the knee cap.
Mucous membrane: thin, slick, transparent lining,
                                                    Phalanges: bones of the fingers and
covering tubes and cavities that open to
                                                    toes.
the outside; the inner surface of the
mouth, nose, eye, ear, rectum, etc.                 Pharynx: the back of the mouth
                                                    and above the voice box (larynx); a
Musculoskeletal system: all of the
                                                    passageway for both air and food.
bones, muscles, and connecting tissues
which allow locomotion (movement of                 Physiology: the study of functions of
the body).                                          the body.
Myocardial infarction: death of part of             Placenta: an organ attached to the
the cardiac (heart) muscle; heart attack.           uterus which provides a fetus with
                                                    nourishment.
N                                                   Plasma: a pale yellow fluid containing
Nail bed test: a method of assessing
                                                    blood cells, nutrients, gases and
the adequacy of circulation to the
                                                    hormones.
extremities; gentle pressure is exerted
on the nail bed until the tissue whitens;           Platelet: a small, cell-like blood
the return of colour to the area is                 element important in blood clotting.
assessed upon pressure release.                     Pleural membrane: a slick membrane
Negligence: failure to perform first aid            covering the outside surface of the
at the level expected of someone with               lungs and the inside surface of the chest
similar training and experience.                    cavity (thorax).
Nerve: a cord made up of fibres which               Pneumonia: inflammation of the lungs.
carry nerve impulses to and from the                Pneumothorax: an accumulation of
brain.                                              air in the pleural space. Normally the
Nervous system: the brain, spinal cord
and nerves which control the body’s
                                                    pleural space contains a negative
                                                    pressure or a vacuum; the air mass                        G
activities.                                         (instead of a vacuum) collapses the lung
                                                    under it.
Nitroglycerin: a drug used to ease the
workload on the heart; often carried as a           Position of function: refers to the
pill or spray by casualties with angina.            position an injured hand is placed in
                                                    when bandaged and/or splinted; i.e.
O                                                   fingers are gently curved with palm
O2: the chemical symbol for oxygen.                 slightly downwards.
Obstructed airway: a blockage in the                Primary survey: a step of ESM—

                                                                                                        323
     assessing the casualty for life-               Scene survey: the initial step of ESM
     threatening injuries and giving                (emergency scene management ) where
     appropriate first aid.                         the first aider takes control, assesses any
                                                    hazards and makes the area safe, finds
     Proximal: refers to a part that is closest
                                                    out what has happened, identifies self
     to the attachment of a leg/arm/finger/
                                                    as a first aider, gains consent from the
     toe/intestine.
                                                    casualty, calls for help from bystanders
     Pulmonary artery: the major artery             and starts organizing them to get help
     emerging from the right ventricle;             for the casualty.
     carries deoxygenated blood to the
                                                    Sclera: the white of the eye; the tough,
     lungs.
                                                    opaque layer of the eyeball.
     Pulse: the rhythmic expansion and
                                                    Secondary survey: a step of ESM;
     relaxation of the arteries caused by the
                                                    assessing the casualty for non-
     contractile force of the heart; usually felt
                                                    life-threatening injuries and giving
     where the vessels cross a bone near the
                                                    appropriate first aid.
     surface.
                                                    Sign: objective evidence of disease or
    R                                               injury.
     Radiate: to diverge or spread from
                                                    Sling: a support for an arm or shoulder,
     a common point; the pain of a heart
                                                    usually brought around the neck.
     attack in the chest radiates to the left
     arm.                                           Spleen: an organ of the lymphatic
                                                    system; functions to cleanse foreign
     Radius: the bone on the thumb side of
                                                    matter from the blood; blood reservoir.
     the lower arm.
                                                    Spontaneous pneumothorax: air in the
     Red blood cells: the most numerous
                                                    pleural space due to an unexplained
     type of blood cells; carry oxygen.
                                                    rupture of the underlying lung.
     Respiratory arrest: stopped breathing.
                                                    Splint: is a rigid and padded support
     Retina: the covering at the back of the        used to prevent movement in a bone or
     eyeball; changes light rays into nerve         joint injury.
     impulses.
                                                    Sprain: supporting tissues about a joint
     Reye’s Syndrome: A rare but serious            (such as ligaments) are stretched, partly
     disease in children and adolescents            or completely torn.
     that is reported to be associated with
                                                    Sternum: the breastbone.
     taking ASA for a viral infection. Reye’s
     Syndrome affects the brain, liver and          Stoma: an opening in the neck through
     blood. It can cause permanent brain            which the person breathes.
     damage or death.
                                                    Strain: a stretched or torn muscle.
G RICE.: R=rest; I= Immobilize; C= Cold;            Sucking chest wound: a wound in
     E= elevation. First aid for certain bone
                                                    which air is pulled into the chest cavity
     and joint injuries.
                                                    through the chest wall; it can cause a
     Rule of nines: a system of estimating          collapse of the lung beneath.
     the amount of skin surface burned.
                                                    Superficial: on the surface of the body;
                                                    as opposed to deep.
    S
     Sacrum: a bone formed from five fused          Superior vena cava: one of the two
     vertebra; forms the back of the pelvis.        largest veins; it drains the arms and
                                                    head of deoxygenated blood and
     Scapula: shoulder blade.

    324
empties into the right atrium.               Urethra: a tube which carries urine from
                                             the bladder to the outside.
Symptom: an indication of illness or
injury experienced by a casualty; cannot     Uterus: the muscular sac which holds,
be detected by an observer without           protects a fetus.
asking.
Syrup of ipecac: an emetic; used to
                                             V
                                             Vein: a blood vessel; carries blood to
cause vomiting.
                                             the heart.
T                                            Ventilation: supplying air to the lungs.
Tendon: a tough cord of tissue that
                                             Ventricles: the muscular lower
attaches muscles to bones or other
                                             chambers of the heart which pump
tissues.
                                             blood into the arteries.
Tension pneumothorax: air in the
                                             Ventricular fibrillation: a quivering
pleural space presses on the heart and
                                             action of the heart muscles so that little
blood vessels and affects their function.
                                             blood is pumped.
Tetanus: a type of bacteria in a wound;
                                             Vital signs: the four signs that show the
can cause severe muscle spasms.
                                             basic condition of the casualty: level of
TIA: transient ischemic attack: a mini-      consciousness; breathing; pulse; skin
stroke.                                      condition and temperature (sources vary
                                             as to the components of vital signs).
Tibia: the bone in the lower leg; on the
large toe side; the shin bone.
                                             W
Tonic phase: first stage of a convulsion     White blood cells: blood cells which
where the muscles are rigid.                 are involved in immunity and control of
                                             microbes.
Tourniquet: a constricting band used to
stop severe bleeding.
                                             X
Trachea: a tube for air, kept open with      Xiphoid process: the cartilage tip at the
cartilage rings; is located between the      lower end of the breastbone.
larynx (voice-box) and the bronchi.
Traction: gently but firmly pulling
below a fracture to bring the limb into
alignment.
Transient ischemic attack (TIA):
temporary signs and symptoms of a
stroke due to a lack of sufficient oxygen
to the brain.
Trauma: any physical or psychological                                                       G
injury.
Triage: a system of placing priorities
for first aid and/or transportation for
multiple casualties.

U
Ulna: bone in the lower arm; on the little
finger side.


                                                                                      325
 Index
                                           Narrow                       133
                                           Roller                       136
 #                                     Bites                            182
 5-rights                         13   Blanket stretcher                 75
                                       Blast injury                     155
 A                                     Bleeding                         142
 Abandonment                      17
                                           Arterial                     142
 Abdominal injuries             155
                                           Internal                     145
 Adult CPR                      115
                                           Vaginal                      258
 AED                        124, 281
                                           Venous                       142
 Airway emergencies               82
                                       Bone injuries                    188
 Alcohol Considerations         259
                                       Breathing                         45
 Allergies, Severe                90
                                           Emergency                    82
 Amputations                141, 146
                                           Ineffective                  83
 Anaphylaxis                      90
                                       Bruises                          139
 Angina                         107
                                       Burns                            167
      Signs and symptoms        110
                                           Chemical                     168
 Animal and human bites         180
                                           Electrical                   168
 Arm sling                      136
                                           Heat (Thermal)               167
 Arterial bleeding              142
                                           Inhalation                   172
 Artificial respiration         270
                                           Radiation                    168
 Asthma                           86
                                       Bystanders                        22
      Signs and symptoms          86
 Atherosclerosis                107    C
 Automated External Defibrillation.    Cardiac arrest                   115
 See AED                               Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation.
 AVPU                             45   See CPR
 Avulsions                      141    CARE                             261

I B                                    Chain of Survival®               109
                                       Chair carry                       71
 Bag-valve mask (BVM)           272
                                       Cheek injury                     161
 Bandages                       132
                                       Chemical burns                   168
      Broad                     133
                                       Chest injury             154, 201

  326
Child                                     Dressings                 130
    Fever                          230    Drug use                  259
Childbirth                         253
Child CPR                          118
                                          E
                                          Ear injury                159
Choking                             93
                                          Electrical burns          168
    Infant                         101
                                          Embedded objects          152
    Self-help                       97
                                          Emergency scene management 34
    Wheelchair                      99
                                          Epilepsy                  228
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary
Disease (COPD)                85          Epi-Pen                    90
Circulation                        144    Extremity carry            72
Cleaning up                         20    Extrication                79
Cold emergency                     235    Eye injuries              162
Collarbone                         205        Chemical burns        165
Communication                       27        Embedded object       164
Compression only CPR               122        Extruded eyeball      165
Concussion                         196        Intense light burns   167
Consent                             16        Lacerations           164
Contusions                         139        Particle              162
Convulsions                        228
                                          F
Cots                                66
                                          Face mask/Shield           19
CPR                       115, 118, 278
                                          Facial injuries           158
    Adult                          115
                                          Fainting                   59
    Child                          118
                                          FAST                      114
    Compression only               122
                                          Fentanyl                  231
    Dispatcher-assisted            122
                                          Fever                     230
    Infant                         120
                                          Figure-8                  135
    Two-rescuer                    124
Crush injuries                     157
                                          Fingernail                150
                                                                            I
D
Diabetes                           226
Dislocations                  189, 190

                                                                      327
    First Aid                  12       Joints               191
      Abdominal wounds        156       Nosebleed            160
      Age                      14       Overdose             234
      Amputations             146       Pinched fingernail   150
      Anaphylaxis              90       Puncture wounds      152
      Angina                  111       Roles                12
      Asthma                   87       Scalp                158
      Bites                   180       Seizures             229
      Blast injury            155       Shock                58
      Bleeding                143       Slivers              150
      Bone                    205       Snakebite            181
      Bruise                  151       Splinter             150
      Burns                   173       Stroke               114
      Cheek                   161       TIA                  114
      Chest injury            201       Tongue               161
      Chest wound             154       Tooth                161
      Choking                  95   Five Rights               13
      Choking Infant          101   Flail chest              202
      Contusion               151   Fractures                188
      Crush injuries          157       Skull                195
      Ear		                   159   Frostbite                241
      Embedded objects        152   Frozen state             244
      Eye injuries            162
      Fainting                 60
                                    G
                                    Gastric distension       277
      Gums                    161
                                    Gauze                    131
      Gunshot wounds          152
                                    Gloves                    19
      Hands and feet          148
                                        Removing             21
I     Head injury
      Heart attack
                              195
                              111
                                    Golden hour               25
                                    Good Samaritan            15
      Hypothermia             238
                                    Gunshot wounds           152
      Ineffective breathing    84
      Internal bleeding       145

    328
H                                   Inhalation injuries               84

Hand injury                  148    Injuries                          29

Head injury                  194        Life-threatening             37

Head-to-toe exam              47        Spinal                       39

Healthcare Providers         268    Internal bleeding                145

Heart attack                 108
                                    J
    Signs and symptoms       110
                                    Jellyfish                        185
Heat burns                   167
                                    Joint injuries                   205
Heat cramps                  245
Heat emergencies             244    K
Heat exhaustion              245    Knots
Heatstroke                   247        Figure-8                     135
Helicopters                   67        Reef knot                    134
Hemostatic dressings     131, 143
High blood pressure          106
                                    L
                                    Lacerations                      140
History                       44
                                    Leeches                          184
Human crutch                  70
                                    Legal                             15
Hyperglycemia                226
                                    Level of consciousness (LOC)      45
Hypoglycemia                 226
                                        Decreased                    61
Hypothermia                  236
                                    Lifting casualties                66
    Immersion                239
                                    Lightning injuries               248
Hypoxia                       82

I                                   M
                                    Mechanism of injury               23
Illness                       30
                                    Medical help                      25
Implied consent               16
                                    Mental Health Awareness          260
Incisions                    140
                                        CARE                         261
Infants
    Choking                  101
                                        Mental Health Continuum      262    I
                                        Occupational Stress Injury   263
    CPR 120
                                        Panic Attack                 261
    Fever                    230
                                    Miscarriage                 253, 258
Infection, Preventing         18

                                                                      329
  MIST                              26    Q
  Moving casualties                 41    Quebec                    17
  Multiple casualties               62
                                          R
  N                                       Rabies                   180
  Naloxone                         233    Radiation burns          168
  Negligence                        17    Rapid body survey         36
  Nitroglycerin                    112    Recovery Position         52
  Nosebleed                        160    Reef knot                134
                                          Rescue carries            69
  O
                                          RICE                     192
  Occupational Stress Injury       263
                                          Roller bandage           136
  Ongoing casualty care          34, 52
                                          Rule of nines            170
  Open fracture                    216
  Opioid Overdose                  231    S
                                          SAMPLE                    44
  P
                                          SAVE ME                  234
  Pathogens                         18
                                          Scalp injury             158
  Pelvic injury                    200
                                      Scene Survey                  35
  Personal protective equipment (PPE)
                                  17 Scrapes                       140
  Pneumothorax                 154, 202   Secondary Survey          43
  Poisons                          249    Seizures             228, 230
      Absorbed poisons             252    Semi-consciousness        61
      Inhaled poisons              251    SHARP                    147
      Injected poisons             252    Sharp objects          19, 20
      Swallowed poisons            251    Shock                     55
  Pressure dressings               131    Shoulder injury          205
  Primary Survey                    35    Signs of injury           23
I Pulse                             46    Skin condition            46
  Puncture wounds              141, 152   Skull fracture           195
                                          Slings                   136
                                              Arm 136


   330
    Tubular                       137    Two-rescuer CPR        124
Slivers and splinters             150
Snakebite                         180
                                         U
                                         Unconsciousness         61
Snow blindness                    167
Spinal injuries           39, 193, 198   V
Splints                           203    Vaginal bleeding       258
    Commercial                    203    Venous bleeding        142
    Improvised                    204    Vital signs             44
Sprains                      189, 190
Stings                            182    W
St. John tubular sling            137    Wound Cleaning         147

Strains                           223    Wounds             130, 139

Stress management                  31        Abrasions          140

Stretchers                     66, 73        Avulsions          141

Stroke                            113        Bruises            139

Sunburn                           177        Contusions         139

Symptoms                           23        Incisions          140
                                             Infection          147
T                                            Lacerations        140
Temperature                        46        Minor              147
Tetanus                           147        Puncture           141
Ticks                             184        Scrapes            140
Tongue injury                     161
Tooth, knocked out                161
Tourniquets                       143
Transient ischemic attack (TIA) 113
Transporting a casualty            67
Trench Foot                       243
Triage                             62                                   I
Triangular bandage                132
Tubular sling                     137
Turning a casualty             37, 42


                                                                  331
Notes
Notes
Notes
Notes
Notes
When you choose St. John Ambulance first aid training
and products, you help support vital programs and
services in your community.


Every year, St. John Ambulance volunteers give over one million hours of
community service, providing medical first response teams at your local public
events, therapy dog teams visiting children and the elderly, or working with local
emergency response units when disaster strikes.
You can also contribute by donating online at sja.ca or by calling 1-888-840-5646.

Charitable registration number 89903 4730 RR0001
Interested in volunteering? Register at www.sja.ca or contact your local St. John
Ambulance branch. Together, let’s build healthy and safe communities!
BE PREPARED FOR ANY
EMERGENCY THAT COMES
YOUR WAY




Charitable Registration No.:
89903 4730 RR0001              sja.ca
